STOP FROM HERE. I HAVE NOT ANALZED ANYTHING BELOW===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3517title: November 6, 2023 - Three Keys to Fast Reactingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:So, you want to react to an opponent's shot like the pro's? That's simple - as long as you follow the three principles to fast reactions. They are:Ready position. If you have a good ready position to start from, it's much easier to react quickly. Many players have poor ready positions, and so aren't ready to move right away. You need to recover quickly from the previous shot (very important, often a problem!), stay balanced, weight on front inside part of your food, feet at least shoulder width apart (as far apart as you are comfortable - watch the pro's, but remember they do physical training that allows their very wide stances), with racket pointing right at the expected contact point of the opponent. Never wait to see if you have to move -expectto move.React, don’t guess. Many players feel panicky and so try to react too soon, and so their first move isn't the right move. Take your time and make sure your first move is the right move - don't try to guess. (There are a few exceptions to this, such as if the opponent is predictable or if he's about to put the ball away and you have to guess where it's going.) Always remember -You have more time than you think!It's surprising but true that consistent quickness comes from taking your time.Move to the ball. In a fast rally, many, probably most players react first by reaching for the ball.NO!!!Always react first byreflexivelymoving your feet. (There are times where you are caught out of position and are forced to reach - but only do this whilealsostepping.) The key thing is that reacting by moving your feet is a habit you can develop with practice. It needs to become your first instinct. One way of developing this habit is to focus on balance - if you keep stay balanced, you are forced to move rather than lunging at the ball.And that's all there is to it. Did I mention you have to practice to develop these things?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3515title: October 30, 2023 - Quicker Drives with the Forehand-Backhand Drilldate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Whoever controls the table controls the rally. It's one of the oldest maxims in table tennis. This usually means playing close to the table with quicker shots than your opponent, forcing him to back off, and thereby both playing more defensively and having more table to play. The Chinese dominated with this from the 1960s until the 1990s, often with blocking and quick-hitting. Then the game changed as loopers began to dominate, often controlling play from a couple steps back.But then a strange thing happened - history repeated. Loopers began playing closer and closer to the table, and they began to (mostly) dominate against those who backed off. It's an ongoing battle, but in general, players who play quicker shots closer to the table have an advantage over those who back up.How do you develop such close-to-table play? One of the best drills for this is the simple forehand-backhand drill. Have your opponent block side to side (or feed multiball), and you simply go side to side, attacking as quickly as you can. Most shots should be top of the bounce, but you might start taking some even on the rise, especially on the backhand. The quicker you do this in the drill - consistently - the better you'll develop the habit for use in games. One interesting thing - I found this to be the perfect drill with a lefty player (I'm a righty), since both players can play crosscourt forehands into their practice partner's backhand, while the partner practices quick side-to-side backhand blocking. For me, this was perhaps the most important drill that led to my improvement during my early years.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3512title: October 23, 2023 - POP Opponents with the Power Of Placementdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Placement is often the unsung hero of many players. I often watch up-and-coming players compete, and it's obvious which ones have been conditioned to focus on placement - it's a huge difference. (As a coach, among the top juniors I have a pretty good idea of which do this well, which do not, and their general tendencies.)I remember watching two top juniors play, and while it was close, one of them tended to dominate the rallies, and won. Why did he win? His shots weren't better; he simply placed them better. He had a great instinct of when to go to the wide forehand, wide backhand, or middle (mid-point between forehand and backhand, roughly the middle). When he went wide, he went as wide as possible, never giving the opponent an easy ball. It's not enough to be aware that you need to move the ball around; you need to do this regularly for a long period of time and learn as you do what types of placements and patterns work. When you do this, it becomes instinctive. (Good tactics is maybe 90% reflexive.) If a coach harps on the player to be aware and (between points and matches) think about placement, more and more it becomes habitual, until you barely need to focus on it anymore - the player does it instinctively.Placement is key to all players of all ages and styles. In general, you need to develop the instinctive habit of when to go to each of the three spots (wide forehand and backhand, and middle), while also being able to adjust this to each player. When I talk to a player between games or in a timeout, if I talk placement, it's usually whether to focus on two spots, or play all three, and when.For example, against one player who was strong from both wings but was very good from the wide forehand, the key was to attack the wide backhand and middle, and rarely go to the forehand unless it was essentially an ace. Since some of the rallies were long, it was tempting to move the ball around more, but that's exactly what the opponent was waiting for. Instead, I had my player just go to those two spots, wide backhand and middle, until the opponent made a mistake, or he changed directions to the wide forehand - and then my player was all over that with his forehand.Against another player, we attacked all three spots, but with one goal in mind - end the point to the wide forehand, since that's the spot the opponent often left open. So we rallied until we saw that shot, and then went after that open spot.How can you incorporate instinctive ball placement into your game?Make a habit of playing all three spots - and make sure you are really going to the wide angles and to the opponent's middle. (Going to the middle takes practice since it's a smaller target, it moves, and different players have different middles, depending on whether they favor one side or the other.)Study what happens with these shots. For example, if you go to one opponent's wide forehand, should you go back to the same spot? Some players will jump all over it if you go there twice; others get caught moving back into position and the second one is the one that gets them.Keep doing this, match after match, for a long period of time. My best guess is it takes about a year of regular match play to really make this type of placement so instinctive that you almostalwaysgo to the right spot.So . . . are you ready to POP your opponents?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3510title: October 16, 2023 - How to Get the Most Out of Your Session With a Coachdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Depending on the coach and the location, you may be paying anywhere from $30 to $100/hour for a professional coach. So you want to get the most out of it. Here are some things to consider. Don't be shy about discussing with the coach what you want out of a session. Here are six things to consider.Warmup. You might try to warm up with someone first so as not to spend much time on this with the coach.Improving and fine-tuning shots. This is where you take the shots you already do pretty well and, as the subtitle says, fine-tune them. For this, the coach is likely more of a backboard, blocking while you tee off with your forehand and backhand loops and drives. Or, if you are a defensive player, you are the one blocking or chopping while the coach does the attacking shots.Fix weaknesses. This is what most go to coaches for. Between you and your coach, work out what weaknesses you need to fix. Then work to perfect the technique, with the coach again acting as a backboard for you to work on the shot. Or it might be something else - footwork, serve, receive, and so on. Make it your goal to turn these weaknesses into strengths!Develop overpowering strengths. This is often the forgotten part. While you need to work on your weaknesses, if you want to really improve a level, you need strengths that threaten players at that level. Discuss with your coach what your strengths or potential strengths are. Then work both on them, and on the techniques that set up that strength. For example, if you have a big forehand loop, then you want serves, receives, and rallying shots that set that up, as well as the footwork to get it into play.Develop new techniques. Think about your game and watch top players and figure out what new techniques you need to develop. Sometimes it's something obvious, like a backhand loop. Other times it's something less obvious, like a serve that might set up your strengths. Discuss these things with your coach.Play points. All the technique work doesn't help if you don't put them into play in game-like situations. Often toward the end of a session is a good time to do this with the coach. You might try improvised points, where you have to start the rally by using the technique you were working on. For example, if you are developing a backhand loop against backspin, play points where you serve backspin, the coach pushes to your backhand, you backhand loop, and then play out the point.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3509title: October 9, 2023 - The Best Youdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:To reach your maximum potential, don't try to be exactly like someone else, or you'll just be a shadow of that person. Instead, focus on being the best you. This includes learning from top players, of course, but that's only part of it. Here are four things you should build on, roughly in order of importance.Proper technique - the foundation, and most importantCopy top playersWhat comes naturallyWhat you inventHow does this work? I'll use myself as an example.Proper technique. When I started out, I had lessons where we focused on good technique. As it says above, this is the most important aspect.Copy top players. When I started out, there was no Youtube, no Internet, and table tennis films were expensive. So I often learned by studying printed photo sequences. When I did get to see film, I studied that as well. I spent a huge amount of time copying Kjell Johansson's forehand smash, Stellan Bengtsson's forehand loop (including tapes of his famous 1977 men's singles quarterfinal match with Mitsuru Kohno, which Kohno won 21-19 in the fifth and would go on to win the event), and so on. You should pick out top players you like who play somewhat like you - or what you want to play like - and copy their technique.What comes naturally. Not everybody is the same. Early on, one player urged me to copy the long, sweeping forehand loop of 1975 World Champion Istvan Jonyer. I tried, and while I could do it okay, I had a more naturally quick stroke. However, while I learned to loop, hitting and smashing came more naturally to me. In fact, at a Seemiller training Camp in the late 1970s, we did a drill where we served and looped against backspin. I struggled so much that I finally just started smashing the pushes. At various times Danny, Ricky, and Randy Seemiller all tried to help me with my looping - but after watching me smash push after push, Ricky finally said, "Larry, just keep hitting!" I did learn to loop, but my smash was always my strength. (In the modern game, I strongly recommend focusing on looping - but whether you use a relatively long or short swing is a key thing to consider.)What you invent. This is particularly true when serving. I've invented a lot of serves. One of them is my infamous forehand "twitch" serve, where I seemingly serve backspin, but right at contact I rotate the racket with a quick twitch so part of it is moving up and sideways at contact - and so it's a topspin even though the serve looks like backspin. But there are others. I invented on my own all sorts of shoulder fakes, so players would think I was hitting one way, but I'd go the other.So - don't try to be someone else, be the best YOU. As much as possible learn proper technique. Copy from top players. While focusing on good technique, do what comes naturally. And invent a few things, often the "fun" part!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3507title: October 2, 2023 - Four Short Serve Scenariosdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Here are six scenarios when serving short. You should incorporate these into your own serving game and learn to follow them up with strong attacks. For these scenarios, I'm assuming your forehand loop is stronger than your backhand loop, and so you'd want to favor it when possible. If you prefer to backhand loop, then make the simple adjustments. With experience, all players should build up various scenarios that match their strengths and playing style. Also note that while I'm emphasizing push returns below, receivers may also flip or push short. If I wrote up every scenario here . . .it'd be a book!!!Backspin/no-spin to backhand. Most often you'll get a push return to your backhand that you can attack. You can either backhand loop or step around and forehand loop. But since it gives the receiver such a wide angle into your backhand, you have to go way out of position to forehand loop. But on the plus side, the receiver has no angle to your forehand, so you can cheat a little bit to your backhand side if you do want to play forehand.Backspin/no-spin to wide forehand. This is an awkward receive for some players, and so can lead to weak or erratic returns. However, it gives the receiver a wide angle into your forehand. To guard against this, you have to stay centered, and so the receiver can just push down the line, taking away your forehand loop.Backspin/no-spin to middle forehand. By the simple trick of serving to the middle forehand instead of wide forehand, you take out the extreme angle to the forehand. Many players also find it awkward playing forehand against balls toward the middle of the table. However, many will simply step over and receive backhand. (Note that this also applies to serving to the middle backhand, but in general that doesn't give receivers as much trouble.)Backspin/no-spin to middle. This often gives you the best of all worlds and is often the go-to serve for most top players. It takes away both extreme angles, and so you have less table to cover. The downside is that the receiver can choose whether to receive forehand or backhand, and so can go with their strength.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3505title: September 25, 2023 - To Hit or to Loop?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:That is the question, and whether you're Ma Long or Hamlet, you have to decide. Back when I started out, the answer was easier - except at higher levels, you mostly looped against backspin, and (except at higher levels) mostly hit against topspin or blocks, though there were plenty of forehand loopers, mostly playing from off the table. But as techniques advanced, and with modern sponge surfaces, the tide turned dramatically – and now intermediate players regularly do what only the top players used to do, especially on the forehand side, but often on the backhand side as well.In the modern game, looping is almost always the better shot, if you can do it. The extreme topspin allows you to play almost any ball aggressively and yet consistently. (The exception is short balls, where the tables is in the way.) With sponges from when I started out, you needed a bigger swing to create this extreme topspin, and in a fast rally, you just didn't have time for this unless you backed well off the table. But with modern sponges and better techniques, even intermediate players can do this without backing up much, and so their shots are more aggressive and more effective.So . . . which should you do?If you are a beginner, you should start out with the basic strokes, which means hitting in rallies and (after you've played for a time) looping against backspin. But once you are proficient with these, it may be time to move beyond that.If you are a junior player who dreams big, then you definitely should make looping the focus of your game. Do it on both wings, forehand and backhand. If you are a good athlete, you should do the same. This doesn’t mean you don’t block as well, but only when forced to.If you are older, or aren't in good physical shape, you should consider focusing more on hitting and blocking. These are easier to do physically, and you can develop a winning game with them against just about anybody below the elite level. Or you might consider doing some physical training so you can play like the stars! Or you might decide, to heck with it, I'mgoingto play like the stars, and develop your game as a looper, like the best players, even if you might be better with more hitting and blocking.In the end, it's a personal choice. I started out as a hitter many decades ago and reached a 1950 level in a little over two years. (I was a late starter at age 16, but I trained hard and long from the start.) Then I spent two years learning to loop and incorporating it into my game, and spent that time around 1800-1850 level. Then my game exploded - but I always could both loop and hit. Now, at age 63 (!!!), I can still easily loop in drills, but in games it's harder and harder to do so in a rally. And so I'm back to more hitting in rallies if I want to win. (It's also a primary reason I retired from regular tournaments, but still play hardbat tournaments, where I can just hit.)So . . . what's your pick?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3503title: September 18, 2023 - Top Ten Table Tennis Tournament Travel Tipsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Some of these are table tennis specific, others are more general - but they are all tips for travel to table tennis events. (Some are things you should do in advance of the tournament to help prepare.)Keep necessary stuff in carry-on bag when flying. Bags sometimes get lost. So try to keep your racket, shoes, and one set of playing clothes in a carry-on bag.Rolling bag. Not only are they great for carry-on bags, but they make it a lot easier to carry your stuff around at tournaments without tiring yourself out from carrying a bag around. They also make handy stands to hold your drink when sitting down - the area where the handle comes out is usually perfect for that.Shoes. Not all floors are equal. With a good, rubberized floor, you can get away with most table tennis shoes. But if the floors are slippery (often with wood or cement floors), you might want new shoes to maximize traction. If playing on cement floors, you might want shoes with more support.Snacks. You need these both for travel to/from the tournament, plus during the tournament. You can't always count of getting what you want at the playing site, so it's best to bring snacks with you. I always bring granola bars.Drinks. Check if water or other drinks will be available at the playing area. Sometimes they only have expensive bottles of water. If so, perhaps arrange a quick trip to a local grocery store for a case of water or sports drink.Luggage scale. If you fly a lot like I do, and often take a lot of stuff - and sometimes more on the flight back (trophies! souvenirs!) - it's important to be able to tell if your bag is over the maximum weight limit if you check in a bag, usually 50 pounds.Here's the one I use– it only costs $10, and it's small and weighs only 3.2 ounces. It's easy to use - just clip it to the bag's handle, lift, and read the display.Stay organized. Make sure you know your playing schedule and keep it handy.Warm-up partner. While it's good to play many styles in practice matches to get used to them, and used to adjusting in general, for warmup you want someone you are comfortable with. Try to arrange in advance who and when you'll be warming up with. Come early - tables sometimes fill up early and then are hard to get.Scout opponents in advance. In particular, watch their serve and receive. Imagine returning their serves, and imagine following up against the type of receives they give. If possible, watch them play from the far side so you can see their serve as the receiver sees it. You can also go to YouTube and put in a player's name, followed by "table tennis," and you'll be amazed how often you'll find a video of your upcoming opponent. If the video is old, however, things might have changed, especially for junior players or players who's level/rating have changed a lot.Thank the tournament director and officials! Do this at some point during the tournament. They are putting a lot of time and energy into their jobs, and you'll likely be working with them in future tournaments.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3501title: September 11, 2023 - The "No Net" Rule Against Heavy Backspindate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:We've all done it - faced with attacking a heavy backspin, often deep on the table, you get nervous and try to weakly topspin it up, and it goes right into the net,plop. Often players get frustrated by this heavy backspin, saying or thinking, "It's too heavy! I can't lift it!" That, of course, is downright silly. Even spinning, the ball still weights 2.7 grams (less than a tenth of an ounce), and anyone who wants to can smack it up over the net and off the end. (I tested this theory once with a two-year-old, who sat on the table and had no trouble smacking my heaviest multiball backspins toward the ceiling.)The real problem is that your instincts tell you that if you aim up, you'll go off the end, and so while you know you have to lift, your subconscious doesn't want to do this. That struggle results in those weakly hit shots into the net. (Or, for some, wild shots into the net. And for others, an over-reaction where they throw their training to the wind and try to consciously guide the shot and end up lifting it off the end.)How do you overcome this? As usual, it involves practice. Find someone who can push heavy, or feed multiball with heavy backspin, and simply get used to it. You have to make it a habit, because only then will your subconscious learn how to do this. And then it'll be automatic.The catch is that if you've spent years struggling against heavy backspin, having trouble with it has become ingrained. Overcoming this will take two things: 1) Practice; and 2) Willingness to miss a shot in practice. Why the latter? Because it is that ingrained wish tomake the shotthat causes your subconscious to fight against the actual need to lift against the heavy backspin. Once you decide that all you want to do is topspin the ball up over the net, even if it goes off the end, then your conscious and subconscious minds can work together and ingrain just how much you should actually lift against a heavy backspin.And now for the key part, right from the title. If you struggle lifting heavy backspin, have a simple rule -Never topspin into the net. Don't worry about going off the end, all you want to do is arc that ball over the net, and not worry about the rest. If you do this, then your technique, timing, and ball control for the shot will develop, and the topspin in the ball will pull it down and give you consistency.And then repeat to yourself, over and over, "Though I loop against the heaviest of chops, I will fear no backspin."Amen!!!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3499title: September 4, 2023 - Tactical Confidencedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:I’ve seen coaches give tactical advice that wasn’t particularly helpful in itself. And yet, it often paid off with the player confidently executing the so-so tactics - and winning. Why? Because it's not always the tactics. Given confidently, these tactics, whether good or not, gives the player a plan, and that inspires confidence. And confidence means you are more likely to make your shots, which leads to confidence, which leads to making your shots, which leads to…Yeah, it's circular reasoning - but you have to start somewhere. And that means developing confidence in any way you can -Confidence, Then Consistency!You don't always need a coach to give you a tactical plan. With experience, you can come up with them yourself - and just as importantly, have confidence in your tactical plans, which leads to your making your shots, which leads to confidence, which leads to…Yeah, I think you get it.Many, many times in my coaching career I've thought of all sorts of ways that my player could win but realized that the key problem was the player wasn't confident in his shots. So, I'd tell him just one key thing he could do over and over. Alone, that one tactic probably wouldn't win the match, though it would make it closer. But by giving just one key thing, the player focused on that, and having that simple plan in mind led to the confidence needed to win. There's actually one go-to tactic that works wonders - just tell the unconfident player to go after the opponent's middle, relentlessly, over and Over and OVER. And in an amazing number of matches, that's all it takes. (This tactic works in most matches, but usually combined with one or two other key tactics. Normally the only time it doesn't work well is against an opponent who is effective at covering the middle with his forehand.)The key takeaway? It's often better to have any tactical plan you are confident in then having a good one that you aren’t confident about.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3497title: August 28, 2023 - Nine Battlesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:How many years have you played before noticing that “Table Tennis” is just an anagram of “Nine Battles”? And it's applicable to our sport. Here's my list of the nine biggest opponents you battle with in a match. Your assignment is to think about each and figure out how best to deal with them.Preparation. This means getting a good warmup as well as going into the match with a relaxed frame of mind. Here's how to getA Good Warm-up.Equipment. Make sure you are using proper equipment for your level and style. (Here'sUse Equipment that Matches the Way You Want to PlayandSuggested Equipment for Beginning and Intermediate players.)Pressure. The more you play, the more you get used to it. But you will also greatly help yourself if you learn a bit aboutSports Psychology.Tactics. You learn tactical thinking by a combination of thinking and experience. (Yeah, there's alsoTable Tennis Tactics for Thinkers!)Strategic. Play to win (tactical thinking) or for the future (strategic thinking)? But you need both. (And yes,Table Tennis Tactics for Thinkersalso covers Strategic Thinking.)Serves. Do you have serves that dominate, either by forcing mistakes or returns you can attack effectively? There are endless articles on this, but perhapsTen-Point Plan to Serving Successhelps.Receives. Do you have receives that control the opponent, while making few mistakes and stopping him from making strong attacks? Here'sThree Types of Receive SkillsandGood Receive Is What Works.Opponent. He's a real person with strengths and weaknesses, who can change his own tactics to adjust to yours. Do your shots match up to his? (Perhaps with a little tactical thinking - see above - so you can match your best shots against his not-best shots?) You might want to learn toSee Things from Opponent's Point of View.Yourself. This is the biggest battle of all, and often includes all of the above. The key thing is to believe in yourself. See1% Hesitation = 100% Miss.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3494title: August 21, 2023 - The Value of a Good Stiff Pushdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:I once watched video of a top junior who'd just lost a close five-game match. He's normally an aggressive player, but has a good, stiff push that often catches opponents off guard. He's also comfortable blocking, so he can get away with letting the opponent attack first as long as he's not giving him an easy attack. But in this match, something went wrong.Here's the part that stood out. When he pushed serves back long 2-3 times a game, the opponent wasn't really ready for it and he won about half those points. But toward the end of the match he began pushing more. In the fifth game, he pushed five serves back long and the opponent was ready - and won all five.The lesson? A good, stiff push, even at high levels, is a highly effective weapon when the opponent isn't expecting it. Corollary - below the elite level, a good stiff push is almost always effective, as long as the pusher is comfortable if the opponent does a soft attack.So, what is a good, stiff push, and when should you use it? Roughly speaking, there are six attributes of a good, stiff (i.e. long) push – and if you don’t practice them, you won’t be able to consistently execute them:Quick off the bounceDeepLowHeavyAngledDisguised placementAt higher levels, you want all six. At lower levels, you might get away with doing only some of these. Sometimes you can get away with just one, such as pushing really heavy or well angled. (Here's my Tip from 2011,Pushing: Five out of Six Doesn't Cut It.)When should you give the opponent a stiff push? It depends on the opponent. If they have trouble with them and don't really seem to have any way of dealing with them effectively, you can win an entire match almost entirely on this one shot. Against others, you have to be more judicious in their use. If they know it's coming, they'll be set for it. Against some players, it's the best way to return the serve. But it's usually best to push long when the opponent doesn't know it's coming. That means being aware of what your opponent is doing. Is he jammed to the table, vulnerable to a long push? Is he crowding his backhand corner, looking to forehand loop from that corner? Have you given him any short balls, so that he has to stay close to the table, watching for them, thereby making him a bit slower in reacting to deep pushes? With experience, you begin to see these things automatically, and then you automatically will give your opponent a good, stiff push at just the right time.So . . . is it time to get pushy?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3493title: August 14, 2023 - Shadow Replaydate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Over the many decades I've watched and learned about this sport, there are certain trends I see that stick out. This is one of the simplest, often the difference between fast-improving players and those who just stare at their rackets in frustration after missing a shot and continue to do so the rest of their playing years.When you miss a shot, instead of staring at your racket in disbelief, or whatever other bad habits you've picked up after missing, instead do a simple thing: shadow practice the shot as you should have done it. It's a simple way of re-enforcing to the subconscious what itshouldhave done, rather than what itdiddo. There are a zillion things that can go wrong with a stroke, and if you do one of those things wrong and don't correct it, guess what? You'll do it again. And again. And again.Suppose someone pushes heavy to you, and you mistakenly baby the ball, and so either go into the net, loft it off the end, or (probably worst of all) make a weak topspin return that any good opponent will smack into subspace. Or perhaps you stroke it properly but misread the spin and so go into the net or off the end. Immediately after the rally, shadow practice what youshouldhave done. Then, the next time you face this same heavy push, guess what? You are far more likely to do it properly than if you had just stared at your racket. Sure, staring at your racket allows you to accurately describe your racket, but that's not very helpful to your table tennis future. Instead, fix the problem immediately.And guess what? By doing so, you'll likely start doing it correctly, and it'll be the other guy staring at his racket wondering why he's not as good as you!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3491title: August 7, 2023 - Active Feet on Receivedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Watch a top player when he's about to receive, either live or, better still, on video so you can replay or even do slow motion. While players often have some differences in their stances and how they move, most have two things in common. First, they start out low. Second, as the serve is approaching, they stand up a bit straighter with a small bounce, which allows them a quick start when they come back down again. They actually do this small hop every shot as they go from ready stance, hop, and move to ball. Many players do this in rallies, but forget to always do it on receive. Others are not in good physical shape and so find this difficult to do in rallies - but while this may be somewhat true, there's nothing stopping them from doing this on receive, where they have more time to prepare. By doing this little hop, a player gets a much quicker start, whether to the left, right, or stepping in. Here's video ofFan Zhengdong vs. Timo Boll, or pick out your favorite players and search for them on Youtube, and focus on just their feet during receive. (I chose Fan vs. Boll both because it gave a good angle to see their feet, and it shows the current world #1 from China vs. the former world #1 from Germany.)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3489title: July 31, 2023 - Total Confidencedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:In table tennis and other sports, your subconscious is trained in a training environment, where there's no pressure and so players can relax and just drill their shots or play practice points. With no pressure, there's little hesitation or rushing of shots. If one of those happens, the player or coach makes sure to fix it, and without pressure, it's not hard to fix.Then you get into a match where there is pressure. A confident player does the same under pressure as he does without. But even the least, tiny bit of hesitation can completely destroy your timing for an entire match. It usually starts with a hesitant shot that misses because you (rightfully!) didn't train to do hesitant shots and so have little control over them. Trying to compensate, you then rush a shot. Suddenly your subconscious doesn't know what to do - all that training is gone as it can't time hesitant or rushed shots.Ironically, the player often thinks he just needs to practice the shot more until he can "do it in his sleep." While that's helpful, it doesn't really fix the problem here. The real problem is if you aren't confident, then neither is your subconscious, which is what times and executes your shots.So the real problem here is confidence. When walking, you have complete confidence you will make that next step without tripping - but you don't actually think about it, you just keep walking flawlessly. Similarly, you need to have complete confidence in your shots without actually thinking about it. The key here is sports psychology.Here are a few links. Go to it - and don't hesitate!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3488title: July 24, 2023 - Subconscious Adjustment as a Habitdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Everyone plays a little differently, and it's important to play as many different players as possible. Some might think this is so you can learn to play every style, and there's some truth to that. But that's only for learning to play general styles - two-winged loopers, one-winged loopers, hitters, blockers, choppers, lobbers, and so on. But there's something even more important, and that's developing the subconscioushabitof adjusting.Suppose the players at your club have varied styles, and you play them regularly. Then you get used to playing each of them. The problem is that instead of adjusting to each of them, you are now playing the way you are used to playing them. Instead, you need to develop the habit of adjusting to new players. Otherwise, when you play new players in a tournament, you become robotic, unable to fully adjust to new players since you are only used to playing those specific players you are used to playing. If, instead, you regularly play different players, then it becomes a subconscious habit, and adjustment comes naturally. When this happens, you no longer have to worry about playing "weird" styles or shots, since you are used to adjusting - and that means you can adjust toanything.Playing lots of different players can be difficult if the number of players at your club near your level is limited. Here are three ways to make up for that. First, play players who might not be near your level but play different styles. If they agree, perhaps have the stronger player spot points to make it competitive - with the spot going up or down a point based on who won each game. Second, play at other clubs. And third, play lots of tournaments!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3486title: July 17, 2023 - Five-Minute Ruledate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Nobody likes losing. (If you do,Dumb Ways to Losemight help.) There are always those players who smile immediately after losing, but usually that's either hiding an inferno on the inside, or it was against a much stronger player where they simply enjoyed the opportunity.The reality is that losing a match that you could have won is frustrating. It takes time to get over a loss. Some recover quickly, others mope on it all day or week. The further reality is that if you don't get over it, it will affect you in future matches.So, what should you do after a bad loss? There's a simple one-two combo.Sit down and think overwhyyou lost. Was it a technique that needs more work? Tactical? Physical? Sports psychology? Whatever it was, figure out what you need to do to do better next time. As soon as you've figured this out, go directly to part 2.Five-Minute Rule. Within five minutes of losing, you have to be over it so that your mind is completely clear and ready to go again. You can time those five minutes starting either from when the match ended or after you finished your analysis in part 1. How you do this is up to you. Some just sit back and clear their mind. Others listen to music. Still others talk to others to get their mind off the match. Whatever works for you.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3484title: July 10, 2023 - Forehand Back Foot Placementdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When you first start out, players are taught to move the back foot backwards for forehands. (This would be the right foot for righties, the left for lefties.) This makes it easy to backswing and opens up a larger hitting zone from the side. Historically, this is how forehands were taught. However, as the game got faster and faster, at higher levels there simply wasn't time to bring the foot back while staying close to the table. This meant that those who did bring the foot back were often forced to step back in a fast rally, putting them at a disadvantage against a player with a quicker forehand stroke, who would now dominate over the table.And how did that player get that quicker forehand stroke? By not moving the back foot backwards in fast rallies, i.e. there's no back foot, the feet stay parallel to the incoming ball for both forehands and backhands when taken near the table. (When you have more time or are forced off the table, then the foot usually goes back.)As you improve, experiment with playing forehands with the feet parallel to the incoming ball, or closer to that than you normally do. This allows the quicker stroke. However, you need to be a bit limber to do this - you might need to do some physical training - so not everyone can do this effectively. (I can do it, but not very well - either because I learned early on to always bring my foot back, or because I'm older and no longer train. I always bring my foot backwards for forehands except when blocking.)In general, if the ball is coming at you slow or if you are off the table, bring the foot back. If you are closer to the table or rushed, keep the feet more parallel. Add that to your Fact Book - which is just an anagram of Back Foot!Here is an example(8 sec), with 14-year-old Stanley Hsu (far side, about 2400, who just swept the Under 15 Boy’s Singles, Doubles, and Mixed Doubles at the 2023 Nationals) with Coach Cheng Yinghua. Stanley blocks two, and then counterloops close to the table for a winning shot - and does so with his feet parallel to the incoming ball. If he'd tried to bring his right foot back, it would have slowed him down, making the shot more difficult and probably rushed.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3490title: July 3, 2023 - Consistent Rallying Pacedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the toughest things is convincing developing and even advanced players to slow down for consistency. Too often they want to play at a rat-a-tat superspeed, believing that the way to develop fast rallying speed is to practice using full speed before they can control it, and that consistency will eventually come.Wrong!!!All this does is ingrain the habit of spraying the ball everywhere with erratic, inconsistent shots. Instead, find a pace that you can rally atconsistently, and practice at that pace, so you can actually develop that consistency with good technique. As you improve, you can increase the pace. The goal is good technique and timing. Once you have those two ingrained, power is easy.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3482title: June 26, 2023 - See Things from Opponent's Point of Viewdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the hardest things for players and coaches to do is see things from the opponent’s point of view. They think about what they want to do, and about tactically playing into specific weaknesses of the opponent. But they aren't really seeing things as the opponent sees it.It's easy for an experienced coach or player to figure out what the opponent's strengths and weaknesses are, and then work out the tactics to play him. What's harder is to continuously see things from their point of viewas the game progresses. Tactics aren't static; they change as the match continues. If a serve works once, that may have been because of surprise. Only if you can see it from the opponent's point of view can you better figure out if he'll be ready for it the next time. The same is true of other tactics. Did he block your spinny loop off the end because he was caught off guard by it, or because he's actually weak against it? Will he adjust? How often should you use that serve or spinny loop to maximize its effectiveness without letting the opponent get used to it? What exactly do you do that "scares" the opponent?These are the questions that can only be answered if you see things from the opponent's point of view. So, for the tactically minded, it's an important habit to develop.However, this can also be overdone. You don't want to get so wrapped up with seeing things from the opponent's point of view that you lose track of whatyouwant and should be doing. Ideally, you should be forcing your game on the opponent, and trying to make him adjust to you more than you have to adjust to him. But it's a balancing act - and finding that balance only comes from being able to see it from both sides, and with experience, learning to apply both.Or become a mind-reader. That makes things a lot easier!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3480title: June 19, 2023 - Stepping Versus Lungingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players reflexively reach for the ball when caught out of position. This means leaning toward the ball, with your weight on the foot in the direction you are trying to move - and so you can no longer move in that direction! And so, rather than move into position you are forced to lunge for the ball. If you'd instead stepped, you would be in a much better position to make a good shot. This is a fundamental problem that should be fixed. Instead, the first reflex should be tostepto the ball, while staying balanced. Reaching should only happen as a last resort. (Stepping includes shuffling so both of your feet move together.)The only "good" lunging is after you have already stepped to the ball, and still cannot reach it. (It means you were truly caught out of position, a separate problem you might want to address.)One way to practice this is to imagine a loose-fitting hat on your head, or actually wear one. Try to move without the hat falling off. This forces you to stay balanced as you move to the ball rather than lunge. And then, if you still can't get to the ball, only then should you make a last-second lunge as your hat falls off.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3478title: June 12, 2023 - Accelerate Through the Ball for Powerdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Mike Tyson once said, "I tried to punch his nose bone into his brain." That's a rather graphic way of showing how to maximize power as well as killer instinct. (That's a separate issue.) But it is one of the reasons why he had such power. In boxing, they tell you to punch through the target. This forces you to accelerate your fist through the target, thereby maximizing power.The principle is the same in table tennis. When you are looping or smashing, don't think of hitting the ball; think ofaccelerating through the ball. If you just hit the ball, then you lose much of this natural power. Don't try to spastically "muscle" the ball; it should be a smooth acceleration through the ball, leading to "natural power."And if you want to add in some killer instinct, smack the ball so it goes right through the table! That way you not only get power . . . but you make sure it actuallyhitsthe table.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3476title: June 5, 2023 - Random Drills Placementdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:In the standard random drill, one player (the "feeder") plays backhand (or forehand) randomly anywhere while the other player (the "driller") keeps it to his backhand (or forehand). There are really two things going on here, as both players are actually doing a drill.For the "driller," he's reacting to ("neuromuscular adaptation"), moving to (footwork), and stroking (technique) the ball. He's also learning to recover from the placements of the feeder. This is one of the most game-like rally drills you can do. Do the drill regularly and it becomes instinctive.For the "feeder," it's key to remember that he's also doing the drill. However, his focus is on consistency and placement. Consistency is key, as with all drills. However, to get the most out of this drill, focus equally on placement. This is where you learn to go to the "three spots" - wide forehand, wide backhand, or elbow (midway between forehand and backhand). But it’s not just randomly playing the three spots – this drill allows players to learn what combinations work. For example, when you go at the middle, it forces the opponent to move out of position to play forehand or backhand – and so one of the corners open up. Sometimes the player overreacts to cover the open corner, and so the other corner is the one that opens up. This drill allows the backhand player to learn how best to maneuver the opponent around. Do the drill regularly, and it becomes instinctive.In both cases above, the key phrase was "Do the drill regularly, and it becomes instinctive." When it becomes instinctive, you'll do it in a game, and your level will shoot up.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3474title: May 29, 2203 - Solving Slow Starter Syndromedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:A common problem for many players is starting slow. Often they have a bad loss or two before they get going, and from there on they play well - but it's too late for that tournament. And this happens over and over. I struggled with it for many years as well - in fact, in my early days, I relied on my serves at the start until the rest of my game came around. If not for my serves, I would have lost the first game to just about everyone competitive. But I solved this problem. Here's how.The key is both physical and mental. Physically, players do too much robotic warmup, and so aren't ready for real play. Instead, the last few days before a tournament should include lots of random drills and match play, and that prepares you better. Before playing the first match in a tournament, it's also best to play real points to prepare. Everyone's different - when the Hungarians famously upset the Chinese at the 1979 Worlds, I’m told they did two three-hour practice sessions just before the final, back-to-back, with only a short break in between to prepare. But they were in incredible shape. I used to need about an hour to warm up and be at my best.Mentally, it's a matter of getting yourself into the same mental state you'd be in later on, when "in the zone." Being in the zone isn't anything magical, it's just a matter of focus. Some do this easily; some have to play (and often lose) several matches before getting into it. Instead, as I always tell my students, "Think of the mental state you were in during the best match you've ever played." Then go into the match with that same mentality, for every match you ever play. For me, I spent many years remembering the mentality I had when I beat 2550 player Rey Domingo in 1990, 21-15, 21-14. It was magic – everything seemed in slow motion and I could do no wrong. That's what worked for me when I had to overcome this same problem many years ago and has worked for many others I've coached.The key is to go into the match able to "play free," where mental and physical overlap. The physical side means letting yourself go and just reacting to an incoming ball. That's why predictable warmups like forehand to forehand or standard footwork drills won't by themselves prepare you for a match - you aren't reacting to an unpredictable ball since you know roughly where the ball is going, and so aren't working on "playing free." Besides playing points (not necessarily games), a great drill to get into this is a standard random drill, such as where your partner blocks to all parts of the table and you just react, FH or BH, like in a game, except keeping it to one side, either forehand or backhand. This allows a player to get into "playing free."It's also good to have a code word or phrase that you tell yourself, that helps signal your subconscious that it's time to play. I always feel a bit sluggish early on, and so mine has always been simply "push yourself." I would say this to myself between points as I walked about, and it worked, both physically and mentally.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3472title: May 22, 2023 - Table Tennis Gemsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:I think you'll find these 20 general tips useful. Many are covered in other Tips, but now they are compiled in one listing!If your opponent hits the ball aggressively at your crossover point between your forehand and backhand (where your playing elbow is), return it mostly with your backhand if you are close to the table, with your forehand if you are away from the table.Learn to place your shots either to the wide corners or to the opponent's crossover point between backhand and forehand (roughly his playing elbow).When the incoming ball is traveling slowly (serves, pushes, chops, etc.) use more wrist. When the ball is traveling fast (fast drives or loops, etc.), use less wrist.If your opponent is looping your serve effectively, you have three options: 1. Serve shorter (so ball would bounce twice before going off the end of the table) so opponent can't loop; 2. Serve faster, so he cannot get into position or react; 3. Lose.If your opponent keeps hitting forehand winners from his backhand corner, play to his forehand first, and then come back to his backhand.When playing a combination racket, don't avoid the off-surface. The off-surface (long pips, anti, etc.) is a weakness in your opponent's game, or everyone would use the stuff. Learn how to exploit it and play both sides tactically.Don't go into a match with the goal of winning - it can only hurt. Go into the match with the goal of playing your best, and you will maximize your chances of winning.Age and smart tactics will often beat youth, athleticism, skill, and poor tactics.Learn to serve legally. Someday an umpire might require you to do so.There is nothing more sorry than working for the point, getting the shot you want, and hitting it to the one spot on the table your opponent can reach. Place your shots.If, in a typical game, you miss two easy winning shots because of lack of concentration, you are rated at least 100 points lower than you would be if you concentrated throughout.If you have trouble topspinning against backspin, you probably aren't opening your racket enough. If you have to strain to lift a backspin ball, you definitely need to open your racket more.When you block, sink the ball straight through the sponge to the wood. You should hear and feel the wood. (This is different than a "topspin" block where you essentially spin the ball off the bounce.)Develop two types of serves: serves that you can consistently follow up with the type of attack or rally that you want, and "trick" serves meant to fool an opponent outright. Develop both, but rely on the first type. Don't overuse the latter or they will lose their effectiveness.One of the quickest ways to improve is to learn to serve short (usually backspin) and, since most players will push it back long, follow with a well-placed forehand or backhand loop.A spinless serve that looks spinny is more effective than a spinny serve that looks spinny. To serve no-spin, simply contact the ball near the throat of the blade (where racket travels slowest) instead of near the tip (where racket moves fastest), but still use a spinny-looking motion.It is easier to serve short consistently if you make the first bounce on your side of the table closer to the net, and by grazing the ball so the ball has more spin than forward motion.To serve the ball so it bounces very low on the other side, contact the ball at net level or lower; graze it so it's mostly spin; make first bounce closer to your own endline but not so close that you can't keep it short (assuming you want to); and have it cross the net as low as possible.When serving fast, make the first bounce on your side of the table as close to your endline as possible. Make the second bounce on the opponent's side of table as close to his endline as possible. This maximizes the amount of table for the ball to drop onto, and so maximizes how fast you can serve. It also jams and rushes the opponent by going deep.If you win the first game easily against a player near your level, watch out! He has nothing to lose in the next game, and you do.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3470title: May 15, 2023 - Are You Trying Too Hard?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Dang it! How'd I miss that?!!! I can't play!These (or perhaps harsher words) are the words of a player who is trying too hard, i.e. pressing too much. This is also true if you feel like saying these things during a match but hold back. They are symptoms of a player wants to win so badly they can't play well, and so don't win nearly as often as they could.Instead, learn to play with a more relaxed attitude. This doesn't mean no emotion, but onlypositiveemotion. The more negative emotion you have, the less confident you'll be, and the harder it will be for your subconscious to do the things it's been trained to do, i.e. play table tennis at your "normal" level.When you do feel these negative thoughts, there aresports psychologymethods to overcome them. However, it's far, Far, FAR better to play with an attitude where you rarely face such thoughts during the match.You do want to try hard, but in a different way. You should be fighting physically and mentally. But you should be battling anopponent, not yourself. Instead, focus on individual points, think simple tactics, and let your training take over. Have fun, stay cool, and you'll maximize your chances of playing your best - and yelling, "Yes!" at the end.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3468title: May 8, 2023 - Five Tips to Increase Forehand Looping Powerdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you are the type of player who has trouble generating power when forehand looping, try out these five tips -  call it the "Fearsome Fivesome" - and you'll be surprised at the improvement. (If you have natural power, then here’s the most important tip – don’t worry about power, just let the shots happen naturally – don’t try to muscle the ball - and instead focus on consistency and placement. See #4 and #5 below.)Use a wider stance, with your legs farther apart. This leads to a greater weight transfer and thereby more power.As you backswing, bring your wrist back as well, so that it can naturally snap through the ball during contact. You should especially use wrist against a slower incoming ball, such as a push.Contact the ball more from your side as your body is rotating. Many players contact the ball too much in front, with their arm going forward after the body has already rotated, and so end up swinging mostly with their arm, with contact in front.Focus on "easy power," where you let the muscles smoothly contract in rough order from bottom to top (from legs to forearm & wrist), rather than try to spastically "muscle" the ball.Almost remember that consistency and placement is more important than raw power. Instead of trying to rip it through their waiting forehands or backhands, try a relatively fast but consistent loop that goes to a wide corner, to the opponent's middle (midpoint between their forehand and backhand), or done deceptively where you aim for one corner, and as your opponent to reacts to that, change directions to the other corner.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3466title: May 1, 2023 - Tactics at the End of a Close Gamedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Rarely have I heard more (and often weird) opinions on what to do at the end of a close game. Some say, "Play safe!" Others, "Go for it!" And a zillion other types of advice. The reality is that the end of a game is only different in two ways.First, there should be no holding back on your best serves or best shots. If you have a serve that gives the opponent trouble, earlier you might not have wanted to overuse it and let him get used to it. But now is the time to use what worked before. He may know it's coming - and yet, you should probably serve it anyway. If you don't, and you lose with a weaker serve, you'll be kicking yourself afterwards, and your opponent will likely also be glad you didn't use it and wonder why you didn't. But this comes with experience - if you think the opponent is looking for that serve and so will be able to make a good return off it, then perhaps set up as if you are doing that serve and cross him up with another. While serves are the obvious example of something to use at the end, you should also bring your other winning shots into play. If the opponent had trouble earlier against your heavy push, now's the time to make him face it! (But assume he handles it this time and be ready.)Second is the psychological aspect. Ideally, you should be calm and ready to play your best. But the reality is some players get nervous in a close game. But guess what - so does your opponent! So mentally prepare yourself for these situations, and remember the opponent faces the same thing. When serving, have confidence knowing you have control over your serve, while your opponent is under much more pressure trying to return a serve since he doesn't know what's coming. When receiving, just clear your mind and do what you do best when receiving - but don't overthink it. (If you really need help on the sports psychology side, Google it, or even "Table Tennis Sports Psychology," and lots of helpful resources will come up.)Ultimately, regardless of the score, you want to play the highest percentage table tennis you can. If that means attacking, you should mostly be attacking whether the score is 0-0, 5-5, 8-10, 10-8, or 10-10. Play your game as that's the best way to maximize your chances of winning, no matter the score. And one last simple tip - ignore the score in a close game, and just focus on the one point. Isn't that all that matters at the time you play it?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3464title: April 24, 2023 - Dumb Ways to Losedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:There's a famous song, "Dumb Ways to Die," that one of our top juniors use to play endlessly as a fun way to relax, often before a big match. (Years later and I still can’t get it out of my head.) Maybe someone should do a song, "Dumb Ways to Lose"? Over the years I have seen so many players find dumb ways to lose that I've concluded that losing was, in fact, their goal. If your goal is to lose, I am here to help! And so, here it is . . . "Dumb Ways to Lose," i.e. Larry's Guide to Losing.Spend the week before the tournament on your sofa watching TV, eating potato chips, and drinking soda or beer. Do the same the week afterwards to console yourself.Use old, worn-out sponge and playing shoes.Show up at the last minute so there's no time to warm up. Warming up is for sissies.Eat a big meal just before your big match.Always figure out the right tactics to beat your opponent after it's too late.Actually, why worry about tactics at all? Who needs to think? It's not like you're playing chess or something. Just play and if you play better, you'll win, right?Try to be highly emotional, with a full panorama of negative emotions: Anger, Disgust, Sadness, and for the emotionally talented, Complete Hopelessness. Practice these emotions on your friends while you still have them.Just before your most important match of the tournament, discuss politics or religion with someone, or just watch the news.When you miss an easy shot, that's all you should think about for the rest of the match. I mean, seriously, you should have made that shot, right? It was so easy! Keep telling yourself that.Constantly think about your opponent's rating, how many rating points you are risking, and the score. These things are important!!!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3462title: April 17, 2023 - Blocking Footworkdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Before a drill, players often ask, "Who's doing the drill?" The answer is, of course,bothplayers. And that includes a player who is blocking. But it's more than that - some would say one player is doing a footwork drill while the other is blocking, but that's totally wrong. They arebothdoing a footwork drill. Good blocking takes good footwork. If you don't move, then your blocking can fall apart like a crumbling wall.Like all strokes, you block better when you have one basic technique, instead of having to reach to the left or right and alter your blocking stroke to adjust. The problem is that, when faced with a hard-hit ball, that's often what a player reflexively does. But that's the point of practice, so you can developproperreflexes. Just as with other strokes, the proper reflex is to move to the ball, so you can block each ball with essentially the same stroke, with minimal reaching.This doesn't mean you never reach for a ball, only that you should train your reflexes so youstartby moving to the ball, as well as reaching if necessary. For a righty backhand blocker, this means moving right to cover the middle, and moving left to cover the wide backhand. A key to this is not waiting to see if you have to move -assumeyou have to move, whether it’s an inch or a foot or more, thereby getting a quicker start once you see the direction to move. This should involve a slight "hop" between shots as you prepare to move - watch videos of top players to see this.You also have to be able to move in to block. You should normally be positioned so as to block deep attacks, but if a loop lands short on the table, you should move in and block it aggressively.How do you develop these reflexive habits?Practice!In this case, perhaps have someone loop over and over to one side, backhand or forehand, but intentionally moving the ball around so it sometimes goes wide, sometimes toward the middle. (Below the elite levels, this will likely happen regardless of where they are aiming as they might not have the control to hit these spots - meaning you get good practice moving!) Focus on stepping to each shot and catching them just right, over and over.Once you do this, you'll find blocking easier and more consistent. And then your blocking will become a wall!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3460title: April 10, 2023 - Top Ten Things For the Day Before the Tournamentdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:How can you best prepare for a tournament on the day before? Here are some ten tips.Practice. Younger and athletic players recover faster and so should train more the day before. Older or less athletic players should practice if possible, both to get used to the tournament conditions and to fine-tune the parts of their game that need fine-tuning. But don't overdo it - you don't want to show up to the tournament with tired or sore muscles. Do at least one footwork drill to get your feet going.Tune-up Your Shots. Regardless of how much you practice just before a tournament, the point is to tune up your shots, not to change your technique or learn new ones. If you want to do that, then you probably shouldn't be playing in tournaments until you've changed or learned those techniques. (The exception is if it's something, like a serve, that you are working on but don't need to use in the tournament.)Strokes. You don't need to practice them all, just the ones you want to work! (Yes, that includes pushing.)Serves. Always practice your serves before a tournament. Make sure you can keep your serves low, accurate, with lots of spin and/or deception. (That includes no-spin that looks like spin.) Probably most important just before a tournament is to practice your fast, deep serves, the ones that are so easy to miss under pressure - and so players either don't use them or serve them slower and weaker. If you practice them the day before, you'll be able to use them with greater confidence and consistency in the tournament.Receive. If there's a specific serve that gives you trouble that you think you might face in the tournament, now's a good time to ask someone to serve it to you.Practice Games. Along with practicing your serves and tuning up your strokes, this is the most important thing to prepare for a tournament. You don't want to play your first tournament match where you haven't played any for a time. If you have the energy, play lots of practice matches just before a tournament.Food and Drinks. Plan your food out in advance. Bring drinks unless you know they will have water or sports drinks.Practice Partner. If possible, arrange a practice partner for both the day before (for warming up before playing practice matches) and at the tournament before your first matches.Check equipment. Racket, shoes, playing clothes - make sure it's all ready! Make sure to clean your racket surface.Sleep. Get plenty!!!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3458title: April 3, 2023 - Do You Need to Be a Top Player to Be a Top Coach?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Does one need to be a top player to be a top coach? The question often comes up, and there's an easy answer. No.However . . . and this is a big HOWEVER . . . it's difficult to become a top coach without being a top player first. It's a matter of opportunity. If you are a member of a National Team, you train for many years with other top players and top coaches, and if you are really paying attention and become a student of the game, you gain the experience necessary to be a top coach.It's possible to be a very good basics coach, one who can train new and intermediate players very well, without being as experienced working with top players. But the key problem to watch for here is that many coaches who teach basics teach them in a way that will later hurt the player. For example, some hold back on teaching the loop in rallies, especially the backhand loop, for so long that hitting becomes ingrained, and so looping never becomes ingrained or comfortable. Or they have the player use beginner's sponge so long that their development is held back because they develop a game around beginner's sponge instead of a modern game based on modern sponges. So even coaches of beginning and intermediate players need to have enough experience with top players to see how they develop so they can teach players a foundation that leads to becoming a top player.Some believe you can be a self-taught coach, and there's some truth to this. But there will always be major holes in your coaching if you don't have the opportunity to spend lots and lots of time with top players and coaches when they train. Even tactical coaching is limited if you haven't spent a lot of time with the player you are coaching when he's practicing. You might be a good tactical coach from personal experience and from watching top players on video and analyzing what you see, but you have to see what the player is doing in practice to see what he can really do. You might see him have trouble with a shot and not know if he normally has trouble with that shot or if he's just off or nervous. You might see a weakness in an opponent that seems to play into your player's strengths, but if the player hasn't practiced that type of sequence, he might not be comfortable doing it. So being around top players and coaches when they train is important if you truly want to be a top coach. This doesn't mean you can't be a decent coach; but to be a top coach you need the full experience.Suppose you were not a top player, but somehow spent years watching top players train and work with top coaches, and really paid attention? Then you could also become a top coach. However, it's difficult to find such opportunities unless you are a top player. If you aren't a top player and want to be a top coach, you have to find opportunities to be around top players and coaches when they train, even if it means volunteering to help in some way, or just observing, perhaps for years, as you learn what top players learn in the many years they train to become a top player. This means showing up to watch their training sessions or attending training camps, where you observe, analyze, and ask questions.There’s also the problem that you can’t really train one-on-one with a top player if you aren’t also a top player, but you can still hit with non-top players, feed multiball, run group sessions, and perhaps block for top players in some drills. (One key thing for non-top players who want to be top coaches – become anexpertin feeding multiball. How do you do this? First, watch top coaches do it – both their technique and the drills they do. And second, by practicing, not just with players, but on your own, by yourself, with a box of balls. And then volunteer to do it in group sessions.) There are numerous examples of non-top players, or players who were good but never national team level, who became top coaches.You want to be a top coach? Start attending training sessions and camps, but not as a player, but as an observer or assistant coach (possibly as an unpaid volunteer), and that’s where you learn. If your level is high enough, most coaches would gladly welcome an assistant coach who can be a practice partner (if an odd number of players) or feed multiball – and while doing this, you learn from that coach and from the top players in the session. Do this long enough, and become a student of the game, and you’ll start really seeing the sport differently – and you’ll be on your way to becoming a top coach.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3456title: March 27, 2023 - How to Win the Choice at the Start of a Matchdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Technically, a match begins with the umpire tossing a coin to see who serves first. In reality, most matches aren't umpired, and so they "hide the ball" under the table, and the other player chooses. Whoever wins gets the choice of either serving first, receiving first, or choice of side. (Once you make your choice, the other player gets next choice, and so on.) It should be 50-50 who gets first choice - but for an experienced player, it isn't really. Here are a few completely honest ways to increase your chances of winning the first choice.If you are hiding the ball…Watch the opponent's other matches and see which hand he typically chooses.Put the ball in your left hand against a righty player, and vice versa. For some reason, most players are more likely to point diagonally with their playing hand. The exception is if they are holding their racket, in which case they will more likely point diagonally with their non-playing hand.Slightly flex the muscles of the handnotholding the ball and hold that hand a little lower. Subliminally, opponents pick up on this and choose that hand. Make sure to do the hiding in a nice, smooth motion. If you do it slowly or with obvious care, he'll think you are being tricky and choose the other (correct) hand. Which means, of course, that sometimes you can hide the ball slowly with obvious care and do everything opposite of the above! (I do this sometimes successfully.)If you are choosing the ball…Watch the opponent's other matches and see which hand he typically hides it in.Players tend to hide the ball more often in their serving hand, i.e. not their racket hand.You can sometimes see a slight flexing in the arm holding the ball.Players tend to hold the hand with the ball slightly lower.Watch out for experienced players who cross you up, especially on #3 above!When I hide the ball and let the opponent choose, using all the tricks in part one, I'm pretty sure I get first choice nearly 2/3 of the time. When the opponent hides the ball, I'm pretty sure I get first choice 3/5 of the time. Of course, this comes with practice - and I've been doing it for 47 years. And, of course, none of this works if the opponent knows you are doing it!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3454title: March 20, 2023 - When to Serve Longdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:At the lower levels, most players serve long both because they haven't learned to serve short effectively yet, and because opponents aren't yet skilled enough to attack them consistently and effectively. As you reach higher levels, long serves become less effective if used too often. But if used at the right time, they are extremely effective, for two primary reasons.The surprise factor leads to "free" points where the receiver misses or pops up the serve.The receiver has to guard against deep serves, and so is less effective against shorter serves.Note that it does take practice to develop effective long serves. Some develop a fast topspin serve, but a pure topspin serve is rarely effective – most opponents reflexively make good returns off them, even if rushed. To be effective, a long serve needs to be fast and deep, and either break with sidespin, or fast and dead (so opponent, used to some topspin, either puts it in the net or overreacts and goes off the end).But when should you use these long serves? That comes with experience. The two reasons above are why I advise players to develop all three types of serves: short (given the chance, would bounce at least twice on receiver's side of table); half-long (given the chance, second bounce would be right about the receiver's endline); and long serves (first bounce on receiver's side of the table is near the endline). But there's a third reason to use deep serves - to develop an instinct for when to use them effectively. Here are some things to take into consideration.How long since last time you used the serve.How effective the serve was when you used it.How the receiver is standing. If he's jammed to the table or leaving a corner somewhat open, it's time to serve long.How he received the last few serves. If he's handling your other serves well, it's time for a change.How much confidence you have in the serve and follow-up shots, where you might be on the defensive if the serve is attacked.So, put variety in your serves with short, half-long, and long serves. Always remember that while Short Serve is an anagram for Hot Servers, Fast Serve is the one many experienced players are often afraid of - it's an anagram for Vets' Fears!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3452title: March 13, 2023 - Study the Player, Not the Balldate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:I've always wanted to implant a camera in the eyes of up-and-coming players to record what they see when they watch top players play. They should see all sorts of great technique and tactics, right? But I'm afraidwhat I'd actually see is this. Yes, all they're really watching is the ball going back and forth, back and forth, back and forth. You don't learn much from that, do you?Instead, to learn from top players when you watch them, focus on the player and what he's doing. See how he prepares for each shot (positioning and ready stance), how he executes the shot (backswing, forward swing, contact, follow through), and how he repositions himself for the next shot. THIS is how you learn, not from watching a small sphere shoot back and forth!And now we're going to do a little exercise. Go to thisSelective Attention Test(81 sec), and follow instructions. Notice how easy it is to see what you are looking for, while completely missing other things? Make sure when you watch a top player to focus on each aspect of what he does, and try to get a complete picture. Otherwise you might miss the obvious dancing gorilla of his technique!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3450title: March 6, 2023 - Don't Practice Missingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Often I see players do drills where they try smacking the ball back and forth as if they were pros. (If youarea pro, then this doesn't apply to you.) They rally at a pace they can't control, and so their balls fly all over the court or miss. If they do hit but not at the place they are supposed to be drilling to, then the opponent's shots go all over the court or miss.It's pandemonium!Drills should not be, "hit-hit-mishit-miss." They should be "hit-hit-hit-hit-hit-hit-hit-hit-hit-hit..."Some think that by practicing at such speeds, they can learn to play at that speed. The part they are missing is that they are practicing missing as much as they are practicing hitting the table! By flailing away at the ball, they aren't improving their technique, control (putting the ball where you aim), or consistency. Instead, work on having great technique, control, and consistency. Have a coach or top players look at your strokes (or watch them on video yourself and compare to top players) so you have good technique. Do drills where you focus on hitting the ball within six inches or so of where you are aiming for control. Count how many shots you can do in a drill to work on consistency. When you have those three, hitting hard is easy.And then, maybe, just maybe . . .you'llbe a pro!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3449title: February 27, 2023 - Start with Your Trickiest Servedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Players often hold back on their trickiest serve (often long ones) until it's close. And that's sometimes a good idea. But there are three problems with that.First, you won't know until you use it if the serve will be effective against this player. Second, if you use it early in each game, then that game might never get close. As long as you space it out, a tricky serve stays effective, so you don't need to hold back on it too much. If it's effective the first time early in the game, then perhaps come back to it in the middle of the game, and perhaps at the end again. And third, once the opponent knows you have this tricky serve (usually long ones), he has to guard against it - making your other serves (often short ones) more effective!If a student of mine has a tricky serve - often a long serve - I regularly tell them to use it the first point of the match. If it works, then it's a judgement call how often to use it. The more you use this serving tactic of using your trickiest serves early, the more experienced you'll get at judging when to use them.One cautionary note - if you want to reach the advanced levels, over-relying on tricky serves - especially long ones - can really hurt your development. Focus on shorter serves that won't give you as many outright serve winners but will set up your attack. Then mix in tricky serves for free points and so the opponent has to watch for them.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3448title: February 20, 2023 - Double Motion on Servesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most serves are too simplistic. They get the job done, but simply aren't done with real trickiness in mind. For example, a player serves backspin with a backspin motion. They may learn variations, such as a side-backspin serve, where the racket travels in a different direction in hitting the ball, or a pure sidespin. But the direction of the racket at contact is somewhat easy to see.Why make it easy on the opponent? Sometimes, just before or after contact, change the direction of your racket so your opponent has to pick up whether you hit the ball before or after the change of direction. Better still, learn to hit it either beforeorafter the change of direction, giving different spins with the same motion. You can also develop a semicircular serving motion, so the opponent has to figure out where in that semicircle you spun the ball - there will be different spins depending on when you hit the ball.Developing serves where you hit the ball on different parts of the swing are tricky. What's easy is doing fast changes of direction just before or after contract, where the serve itself is seemingly simple, but the opponent is caught off guard by the change of direction of the racket. For example, with a forehand pendulum serve, right after contact pull the racket away from you, as if doing a reverse pendulum serve. Or set up to do a reverse pendulum serve (with racket close to you, with the motion going away from you), but "miss" the ball on the out-swing, and then do a regular pendulum serve, with the racket hitting the ball moving toward you. In both cases, it's a forehand pendulum serve, but you've added deception to make things harder for the receiver. Isn't that the goal?Some players do this type of thing on every serve; some do it as a "surprise" to catch the opponent off guard. Try it out and you'll be surprised how many "free" points you get!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3447title: February 13, 2023 - Play Games When Practicing Servesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Developing good serves involves watching players with good serves, getting good coaching, and lots and lots of practice. But sometimes, after all that practice, it's hard to execute the serves in a game as you do in practice. There's a simple reason for that - pressure. There's no pressure when practicing serves, while in a real match there is. It's especially difficult to serve fast & deep under pressure (where players often either miss or slow them down for safety, thereby lowering their effectiveness), in controlling the depth (where that "perfect" half-long serve - where the second bounce would be right on the end-line, now goes long and gets looped), and serving very low to the net. How to overcome this?Easy - put pressure on yourself! After you've practiced your serves to the point where they are near where you want them, imagine you are playing real games. Imagine an opponent. Really get into the mind-set, and soon you'll feel the same pressure. Then you can practice serving under that pressure. Make sure that, under this pressure, you can still control the speed and consistency of the deep serves, and the depth of the half-long serves (second bounce right about the end-line), and the height of all serves. Most players tend to serve a little longer under pressure, and so their short serves suddenly get looped.You might also add to the practice by putting targets on the table, to work on your accuracy under pressure. Put a bottle on the corners and practice hitting them with your deep serves at "deuce," or even "down match point."If you can't execute your best serves under the pressure of a match, then you haven't mastered those serves, no matter how well you do them in practice. So . . . master them!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3445title: February 6, 2023 - Blocking Spinny Loopsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:You push the ball long, and the opponent does a slow but spinny loop. And you block it off, over and over, and can only stare at your racket in frustration. This is often the bane of every beginning and intermediate player. They know they have to aim lower, and yet, the next time they face another spinny loop, they still block off the end. Why?It's simple - a player does what he practices. And the huge majority of your blocking practice is likely against either players with less spinny loops, or who are looping against your block, and so have less spin than one against a backspin. And so your natural instinct is to block as if the ball has less topspin – and so you go off the end.First, the basics. To block a spinny loop, you must close your racket more than you would against a less spinny loop. Your instincts may tell you to do one angle, but you likely have to close it even more, perhaps aiming for the net, perhaps even the bottom of the net. Give the ball at least a light punch - that way the spin won't take quite as much on your racket. Once you’ve made one good block off this spinny loop, remember the feel and the contact, and repeat. (It might also be helpful to watch top players block against spinny loop – the visual image of how effortlessly they do it will help.)Now that you know the above, it's easy to block spinny loops, right? Wrong. You have to practice it. And that means finding someone with a spinny loop so you can practice against it. And the best way to practice against it is with an improvised multiball drill. Get a bucket of balls for your partner. He serves backspin; you push it back; he loops; you block. And that's it - you DON'T play out the point. As you are blocking, your partner should be reaching for the next ball. Result? He gets lots and lots of looping practice, and you get lots and lots of blocking practice, and specifically against spinny loops. As you get better, block more and more aggressive, and as you improve, perhaps practice counterlooping or smashing them.Once you've mastered this, the next time you face that spinny loop in a tournament,youcan become the bane of your opponent!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3443title: January 30, 2023 - Don’t Fix a Problem You’ve Already Fixeddate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:You've spent a lot of time working on a shot, and it's now somewhat ingrained. Suppose, in a match, you make this shot several times . . . and then miss an easy one!!! The shot didn't feel right. A common response would be to try to adjust the shot so you make it the next time.NO!!!!!Why would you try toadjusta shot that you've already ingrained? Instead of starting with the missed shot and trying to adjust, remember the feel of the good ones, and simply repeat. The last thing you want to do is spend time thinking about the missed shot, which is a good way to ingrain that bad shot.Next time you play, whenever you make a good shot, remember the feel, both the stroke and the contact. Do not ever forget that feel. Then, when you miss, just remember the feel of the shot, and it'll come back. You do have to adjust for the incoming ball (such as the spin), but the shot itself should be pretty much the same each time.In that rare case where you absolutely cannot get it right, and the shot just feels wrong, then and only then would you have to analyze it and figure out what is wrong. Once you figure that out, it'll feel right again, and then you'll have the feel of the right shot again.Don't forget it!!!Why fix a problem you've already fixed?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3441title: January 23, 2023 - The Advantages and Disadvantages of Size in Table Tennisdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Table tennis is often advertised as a sport that all can play, where size makes no difference. However, it's not necessarily true. While you don't have to be tall to win (1971 World Champion Stellan Bengtsson at 5'5" and three-time World and 2-time Olympic Women's Singles Champion Deng Yaping was 4'11"), or short (four-time US Men's Champion Jim Butler, 6'5", or 1989 World Men's Doubles finalists Zoran Kalini?/Leszek Kucharski, 6'5" and 6'4" respectively), being big or small does make a difference tactically and in choosing a playing style. It's how you use what you have that counts. Current world #1 Fan Zhendong of China isn’t particularly tall at 5'8". Here are some relatively current players:Tomislav Pucar (Croatia), 6'5?", current men’s world #45, and #30 in 2020.Omar Assar (Egypt) 6'5?" (196 cm), current men’s world #24, and #16 in 2018.Koki Niwa (Japan), 5'4", who retired in Nov., 2022, was men’s #5 in world in 2017 and had 17 monthly rankings in the top ten.Mima Ito (Japan), 5', current women’s world #6, and #2 in 2020.Taller players generally have an advantage in power and reach. They have extra power primarily because a longer body (and especially playing arm) provide a naturally longer swing. They also create extra power by putting their weight into the shot. The extra reach allows them to more easily reach short balls and balls to the wide corners. However, the extra reach brings out a weakness: the center weakness. The farther apart the forehand and backhand strokes are (with the elbow roughly marking the midpoint), the larger the area that a player has to decide whether to use a forehand or a backhand, and the more the player has to move to cover for it.The advantage of reach for a tall player can backfire. Shorter players have no choice but to move, and so are often forced to develop good footwork. Taller players aren't forced to move as often, and so they often do not develop good footwork. To compensate, taller players need to really focus on developing their footwork.Shorter players have an advantage in foot quickness. The lower a player's mass, and the closer to the ground it is, the quicker the start. Taller players can compensate somewhat by bending their knees, using a wide stance, and crouching to lower their center of gravity. However, the larger muscles of a larger player do not fully compensate for their size, although training can. But a shorter player who trains equally will tend to be quicker.The reason the larger muscles of a larger player don't quite compensate for their extra mass is that mass increases to the cube, while muscle strength goes up to the square. In other words, if you double in height without changing proportions, you become four times as strong, but your mass goes up eight times – so your relative strength is actually half what it was before. That's why insects and birds have such thin legs, while elephants and humans have relative tree-trunks for legs.A shorter player also has an advantage in hand/arm quickness, both because the arm weighs less and because a shorter limb is easier to move quickly than a longer one, due to leverage.Size is not the only factor in quickness. Constant practice of a specific motion increases quickness as the nervous system learns to react faster and faster. It's called neuromuscular adaptation and is why an advanced player reacts to a shot faster than a beginner. The type of muscle also makes a difference – "fast-twitch" muscles move quicker than "slow-twitch" muscles, which are primarily for stamina. Everybody is born with a certain percentage of each, but training can change the composition to an extent, as well as the efficiency of the muscles. Great sprinters have mostly fast-twitch muscles, while distance runners have more slow-twitch.A shorter player also has a slight advantage in reflexes. Nerve impulses travel from the brain to the muscles at about 300 feet per second (205 mph), and so a shorter player reacts slightly faster. If the distance from the brain to the wrist on two players differs by one foot, the shorter player will be able to change his racket angle about 1/300 second faster than the taller player. A 70 mph smash travels about four inches in that time--and table tennis is a game of inches. But the taller player can simply back up maybe four inches or more, and use their longer reach to cover the slightly extra angles that allows the opponent, and use their extra power to make up for the slight loss of quickness.An extremely tall player has a disadvantage in that the table is only 30 inches high. To compensate, a tall player must learn to stay very low, which can be hard on their legs. However, the tall player has an advantage in hitting lobs, which shorter players may have great difficulty with.None of the above should be taken as gospel when choosing a playing style. There are very quick players who are tall, and powerful players who are short. (In fact, some short players use their natural quickness and lower center of gravity to throw their entire bodies into the shot even in fast rallies, and so develop great power.) But as a guideline, the above is a short summary to what tall and short players have to deal with and how to do so.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3439title: January 16, 2023 - Anticipationdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players confuse anticipation with reaction. Reaction is when you see what the opponent is going to do and then respond to it. (You can usually do so before he actually hits the ball, often early in their forward swing. Reaction is almost always more important than anticipation, but both have their place.) Anticipation is when you realize what your opponent is going to do before he gives a direct indication of what he’s going to do, and so can position yourself early for the shot. (A key thing is to know when he’s committed to a shot so you don’t move too soon and get burned if he changes direction.) How can you anticipate an opponent’s shot? Here are a few examples.Patterns. Some players, in fast rallies or when pressed, hit almost everything crosscourt, so you can anticipate that. There are endless possible patterns as everyone’s different, so you should learn to pick up these patterns from different opponents. For example, when players go to my wide forehand, I like to set up like I’m going crosscourt, and at the last second go down the line. If I play it aggressively, most opponents can only react to my shot if they anticipate which direction I’m going—and smart ones learn to expect the down-the-line shot. (Very few do.)Serve Returns. When receiving, many players are cautious, and so return most serves crosscourt. You can anticipate this. For example, if you serve deep to the backhand (especially with a sidespin serve that breaks away from them, such as a forehand pendulum serve), most players automatically return crosscourt. If your serve is good, then it’s tricky to attack it down the line, and so if your forehand is better than your backhand, you can edge over and look to attack with it from the backhand side.Your Positioning. If you go out of position, you can often anticipate your opponent will go to the “open” court. But since you know this early on, you can move before he actually hits there, and thereby get there in time. This especially happens when you attack with the forehand from the backhand corner, thereby leaving your wide forehand open. Smart players learn to return the ball to both angles, but many do not, and so you don’t have to wait to know where they are going—to the wide forehand.Opponent’s Swing. You can often guess where an opponent is going from his backswing and the start of his forward swing. (This can also go down asreaction.) For example, if you go to an opponent’s wide forehand, and he takes a long backswing, he’s probably going down the line since he won’t have time to get outside the ball and take it crosscourt.Against a Smash. Most players can’t react to a smash unless they can anticipate where it’s going. If so, then at the last second, as the opponent is starting his forward swing and is committed to a direction, you should anticipate the direction. With experience, you’ll learn the patterns for most opponents, and from that and from watching their swing well before contact, you’ll be able to begin anticipating their probable direction.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3437title: January 9, 2023 - Developing Fast Reflexesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:“I have slow reflexes!” I’ve heard that so many times in my coaching career and in every case, the player was wrong. Why? Because they don’t understand what gives a person fast reflexes, and how to develop them.Nerve impulses from the brain to the muscles travel at about the same speed for everyone. It’s more complicated than that, and there are differences, but these differences are minimal compared to the aspects of those reflexes that you can develop. And there are two major things you can do to develop fast reflexes in table tennis. The first is obvious, the second not so obvious.First, the more you play, the more you develop these reflexes as just that–a reflex. When a beginner plays, he has to almost consciously react to each shot, and so he’s slow in reacting. Advanced players do so subconsciously, as they have developed fast reflexes to any given situation. This just comes from training. (It’s also somewhat sport-specific. There are studies that show that athletes with fast reflexes in their sport have only average reflexes when tested in other sports that they have not trained in extensively.)Second, and here’s the one that’s less obvious and often less developed, you can improve your reflexes by learning to react sooner—and the key word islearning. How? By making a habit of studying opponents, both in practice and games, so that you are aware at what point in their stroke you can see where their shot is going. By doing so, it becomes a reflexive and subconscious habit. And so while many don’t even begin to react until they see the ball coming off the opponent’s racket, others are reacting well before contact since you don’t need to wait until the ball hits the racket to see where the ball is going. Every player is different, so you have to make adjustments—some advanced players, for example, can misdirect an opponent by faking one way and changing direction at the last second. But even with those players you can see when they are actually committed to a direction, and soon you’ll be reacting to their shot before they actually hit it. The reality is most players telegraph the direction of their shot by the time they start their forward swing, well before contact. (One key thing to watch is their shoulders, which often give direction away early.)There are other things that also help you “speed up” your reflexes. If you put the ball deep on the table, you have more time to react. If, immediately after hitting your shot, you look up and watch your opponent, you can see what he’s doing and so react more quickly. If you stay balanced and in a good ready position, you can move more quickly.The result of the above, and in particular the second method? Suddenly you are reacting much earlier to opponent’s shots, and suddenly those hard drives and even smashes are not so hard to react to. And that’s when you realize that those players with great reflexes only have them because they havetrainedreflexes. So can you.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3435title: January 2, 2023 - Mind Gamesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Like it or not, mind games are a part of all sports. They range from "stare downs" in boxing to starting arguments in any sport to force an opponent to lose his focus. The best way to deal with most of them is two-fold: 1) ignore them and keep your focus, and 2) call for the referee if it goes too far. Here are the most common mind games you might face in table tennis.Intentionally showing up late for a match. This can irritate an opponent, leading to him not playing as well. If an opponent does this, smile to yourself and do your best to stay focused and ready. Do not be afraid to ask for a default if the opponent takes too long - check with the referee on how long you have to wait. (Some players are notorious for this. I'm tempted to name names!)Stalling. This can also irritate an opponent. There's no problem with slowing down to a degree to keep your focus or to rest, but there are limits. If an opponent does this too much, get the referee.Playing overly fast. This can trick the opponent into playing points before he is mentally or even physically ready. This you can easily control, especially on your serve. When the opponent is serving, not only should you not go to the table until you are ready (though you shouldn't stall), but you might consider holding your non-playing hand up as you get into your ready position, signaling you are not yet ready, so the opponent can't quick-serve you.Praising an opponent. This gets an opponent to think about the very shots that he is doing well - and that's the quickest way for the shots to fall apart. The best play is almost mindless (other than tactical thinking between points), as you let the subconscious do what it's been trained to do. In general, other than keeping score and other game-related issues, you shouldn't talk to an opponent during a serious match nor should he talk to you. If he does in a distracting way, either give short, quick answers or just ignore him. If it gets out of hand, call for a referee. (In the final of Men's Singles at the Nationals one year, one player was winning relatively easily. The opponent began chanting the player's name between points, punching his fist into the air in unison, and motioned for the crowd to do so as well, which it did, over and over. The player who was winning fell apart and lost.)Staring. Some players are infamous for just staring at their opponent, especially as they are about to serve. If they take too long doing this, call a referee.Intentional minor infractions. They are done to cause irritate an opponent, thereby hurting his focus. These include toweling off at improper times, talking to people on sidelines (that might be coaching), arguing over the score or who serves, kicking the ball away, or walking around opponent's side of the table. When an opponent is losing, he may decide his best chance of winning is to distract the opponent so that he won't play as well - and it often works if an unwary opponent isn't ready for it. Ignore it, knowing opponent is desperate. If it gets too bad, call for the referee. (The classic case of this was the Men's Final at the 1987 World Championships, when, after coming back to reach deuce in the fourth (up 2-1 in games in a best of five to 21), China's Jiang Jialiang walked around the table, walking between his opponent and the table on the far side, pumping his fist the whole time. This seemed to distract his opponent, Jan-Ove Waldner, who lost the game and match.)Screaming. Sometimes this is done innocently, especially by junior players, as a way to release tension - and most coaches, including me, encourage this,to a degree. Other times it is done to intimidate. Sometimes it is both. Since this is generally allowed, get used to it. In fact, you might consider doing it yourself so that it's not all one-sided and to release your own tension - some of it from the opponent's screaming! (For classic example, go to Youtube and pull any video of Japan's Harimoto Tomokazu.)Outright cheating. Call the referee immediately.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3434title: Dec. 26, 2022 - Looping Against Backspin and Topspindate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Some players would say that you aren’t really playing table tennis until you learn to loop. A loop in table tennis is an offensive stroke with the primary purpose of producing lots of topspin. Table tennis is a game of spin, and the loop is the primary example of using spin during a rally.Many players (and some coaches) feel a player should be able to hit lots and lots of forehands & backhands, and reach a relatively high level of play, before learning to loop. Nothing could be more outdated. By the time a player has reached a relatively high level of play, the player’s strokes and major habits are set. If looping isn’t among those habits, it’ll be more difficult to learn later on. The moral is: it’s rarely too early to learn to loop. (For this article, I will be mostly discussing the forehand loop. But you can and should loop from both sides.)This doesn’t mean that a beginner should be looping on his first day. However, once a player can hit a moderately good forehand with moderately good technique, he’s ready to begin the process of learning to loop, even as he continues to develop his other basic strokes. A player shouldn’t think of a loop as an advanced shot; it’s simply another shot, one that should be taught shortly after learning the basic forehand and backhand drive (also known as counter or counter-drive) strokes. The shot also adds excitement and variety to a player’s game, turning a basement player into a dedicated table tennis addict.A beginner should start out looping against backspin, for three reasons. First, it’s more natural, as you are simply adding to the spin, rather than trying to change it. Two, the ball is traveling more slowly than a topspin (usually), and so is easier to learn against. Three, any player with sponge should learn to loop at least against backspin (even pips-out players), so this shot will be part of any player’s arsenal eventually. A player should learn to loop both forehand and backhand against backspin.Once a player can loop against backspin, he’s ready to loop in a rally, against blocks and topspin. You no longer lift; instead, you go mostly forward, spinning almost the top of the ball.Many players learn to loop well against one type of spin (topspin or backspin), but not the other. This usually has to do with the shoulders. Against backspin, drop the back shoulder (right shoulder for right-handers, left shoulder for left-handers) when forehand looping. Against topspin, shoulder should only drop slightly, if at all.Against topspin, footwork is more important. The ball is coming at you faster, so you have to move more quickly. This is a primary reason why older players and those out of shape may not loop against topspin as much.But if you want to really terrorize an opponent, learn to loop against all spins!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3433title: Dec. 19, 2022 - Clear the Minddate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:To play table tennis effectively, you need to have a calm, clear mind, which allows your training to pay off effectively. How often have you actually played a tournament where you entered every match with a calm, clear mind?Shortly before your match starts, simply go off somewhere where it's quiet. Close your eyes. Blank out your mind. Relax. Do this for perhaps 10-30 seconds and you're ready to play. (There are more advanced techniques for doing this - Google "sports psychology table tennis" - but for many of us, this is sufficient. Some do it longer or listen to music.) Corollary: when you're at the table and the warm-up is over, and the match is about to begin, take 5-10 seconds to do the above again, and perhaps every now and then during a towel break or other timeout.This doesn't mean you should be lethargic. Some players (including me) need to get "psyched up" to play well. But you can do that while keeping a calm mind. Before the match, perhaps do some exercise to get the feet going, perhaps jumping up and down lightly or shuffling side to side - but only a for a short time as you don't want to go into the match tired. During the match, do the same sometimes between points, as you'll often see world-class players do. (Older or out-of-shape players might do this less to save energy.) Keep encouraging yourself each point to move and take your shots. If you celebrate after winning a point, that often helps relieve tension, but make sure to clear your mind before starting the next point. A cluttered mind leads to klutzy play. A clear mind allows your training to take over.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3431title: Dec. 12, 2022 - Should You Use a Super-Fast Racket?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many beginning and intermediate players want a blazing fast racket, not realizing how much this is hurting their games. There are three problems with using a super-fast racket. First, it is simply too fast for most players to control. Second, since the ball flies off so fast, you get less spin, which makes your own shots, especially loops, less spinny. And third, since the ball shoots off so fast, players tend to stroke less, and end up developing poor stroking habits.In general, only highly advanced players should use super-fast rackets, and even few of them choose to do so. (They generally prefer fast, flexible blades for looping, but not super-fast.) Instead, try one in the medium to fast range, but lay off the super-fast ones. Slow ones are for beginners and defensive players. (But even beginners should start with at least a medium-fast blade – you don’t want the ball dying off your racket.)While most players should avoid super-fast blades, this doesn't mean you should avoid highly advance sponges that give extra spring to your shots. They actually make looping easier and can lead to rapid improvement. This is especially true if you are working with a coach, at least initially, who can make sure you use these advanced sponges properly.On the other hand, if you are addicted to speed and are willing to lose a few matches in return for this exhilarating speed - then go for a super-fast blade and have fun!If you aren't sure what racket to choose, ask a top player, coach, or a dealer. The major dealers all have equipment experts to help you with this. Ask to speak with one!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3429title: December 5, 2022 - Lobbingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:In 1967, Nobuhiko Hasegawa shocked the table tennis world by not only winning the World Championships, but by using the lob as a primary weapon in doing so. Since then, the lob has become the most spectacular shot in table tennis for both players and fans. It has also become one of the least understood shots in the game.Many players lob far too often. A lob is a defensive shot, but it is unlike all other defensive shots in that it invites the opponent to smash. Only against a weaker player or a very poor lob-smasher will you score a majority of points while lobbing. Therefore, it is advisable to lob only when absolutely necessary, unless your opponent is very poor against the lob. The advantage of a lob is not that you will win most of the points with it, but that you may score a few points that you otherwise wouldn’t – and those points are often all it takes to win. (Another advantage is that by lobbing, you learn to move to and react to hard-hit balls – which is just one step away from counterlooping.)The theory of lobbing is essentially this: If you lob the ball high and deep, the ball will bounce very deep, and your opponent will have to smash the ball from a good distance from the table. This not only forces errors on his part, but gives you time to react to his smashes which, due to air resistance, slow down quickly.A lob, done properly, is basically a very high loop. A good looper can often learn to lob well very quickly because the strokes are similar. When lobbing, first get to where the ball is going as fast as you can. With experience, you can anticipate the direction of the smash by watching the opponent's stroke. On both forehand and backhand you should be turned at least slightly sideways, just as you would for looping. Drive the ball mostly upward, dissipating the ball’s speed by sending it upwards. Sink the ball into the sponge at an angle so you can spin it, like looping, with both topspin and sidespin. Use your legs and upper body in a sweeping motion, as when looping. (Perhaps go to Youtube and search for “table tennis lobbing” and watch how the top players do it.)When a ball is smashed straight at you try to turn sideways somewhat, taking it with either forehand or backhand, rather than standing square to the table and lobbing with the backhand, using only the arm. You may have to do this sometimes, but then the lob will have little spin.The three important aspects of a lob are its height (for control), depth, and spin. Depth is most important of all, since without it your opponent can smash at very wide angles, giving you no chance of returning the ball. A good lob should land deep on the table. Good height and depth make the ball bounce deep. You can also do a lower lob, which is called fishing.Putting spin on your lob can be difficult since you have very little time. It takes practice. Learn to mix topspin and sidespin, making the ball jump as well as break sideways when it hits the table. The idea is to force your opponent into a mistake. When lobbing, you should always be looking for a chance to counter-attack to get back into the point. A sudden counter-drive, chop, or loop return will often change the rally in your favor. Counter-smash or loop if you see a chance, especially on the forehand side where you have a bigger hitting zone. If your opponent doesn’t force you to lob, don’t.Placement of lobs is also important. Some players are slow on their feet and will make mistakes if forced to move side to side too much, even off a lob. If you lob best from one side, a deep, spinny lob to the side diagonally opposite will make it difficult for your opponent to smash to your weak side, down the line.One final advantage of lobbing is that it tires your opponent. This can be a critical factor against anyone not in good shape. When way behind, some top players actually lob intentionally to tire their opponents out for the next game. Also, after smashing a series of lobs to win a point, many players get careless on the next point, as well as a little out of breath.So . . . get lobbing!!! You'll win a few points and have a lot of fun.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3427title: November 28, 2022 – What Comes First, Speed or Consistency?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Top players play at super-fast speeds, and are seemingly able to loop kill or smash at will, and do it all consistently. Those watching often feel that they should try to do the same. Of course, when they try to emulate the pros and their pace, they miss over and over, but the theory is that the more you do it, the better you'll get at it.Wrong!!!Instead, do what the top players didbeforethey learned to play at such a fast pace and put away balls with such ease, both with great consistency - and that was to develop that consistency, from good technique and lots and lots of practice. Instead of trying to play at a pace you can’t do consistently or trying to blast ball after ball, play each shot at the pace you can do consistently. Focus on good technique. When you are consistent at one speed, then up it a little, and keep doing thatgraduallyas you get better and better.Eventually, you'll be so consistent and have such good technique that you'll be able to play at the pace of the pros and seemingly loop kill or smash anything - and so other non-top players will watch you and try to do the same . . . thereby making sure they'll never challenge you!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3425title: November 21, 2022 - Recovering from Forehand Attacks from a Cornerdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When you forehand attack from the wide forehand or wide backhand, following through back into position should be part of the stroke and technique. Too often players don't so this and so can't cover the other wide angle – and then, instead of realizing the root of the problem, they just say, "I'm too slow!"If you forehand attack from the wide forehand, you are wide open on the backhand side if you don't get back into position quickly. Use your own momentum from the shot to move back into position quickly. For righties, that means pushing off your right foot.If you forehand attack from the wide backhand, you are wide open on the forehand side if you don't get back into position quickly. In this case, your natural momentum isn't going back into position - but since you finish with most of your weight on your left foot (for righties), you can smoothly push off and back into position as part of the follow-through.In both cases, by the time your opponent is hitting his shot you should be in a balanced ready position, ready to cover the table. You don't want to still be moving as he hits the shot - it's better to be slightly out of position but ready to move than moving as he hits his shot, and thereby unable to change directions quickly if needed.So . . . are you too slow or are you simply using bad footwork technique?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3423title: November 14, 2022 - Backhand Counter Dominationdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:In table tennis, the forehand is often the more powerful shot – the point winner. But as rallies get faster and fast, the backhand counter becomes more and more important. If you don't have a strong backhand, you're at a huge disadvantage. At tournaments, in match after match, I find opponents who don't know how to score with their backhands. Equally important, they don't know how to stop their opponents from scoring with theirs.The backhand counter should be both a controlling and aggressive shot. You can score with it by outlasting your opponent, moving him around, or by attacking. Anyone with a decent backhand can win (some) points simply by outlasting an opponent, but he would not be taking full advantage of the shot.When countering backhands, don't keep hitting the same shot over and over like a drill. Move the ball around, change speeds and spins and force your opponent into a mistake. Experiment and see what works best for you.There are four spots on the table you should aim for: wide to the backhand (outside the corner), deep to the backhand corner, to your opponent's middle (roughly the playing elbow, midway between forehand and backhand), and the wide forehand. Between the corners is no-man's land and you should rarely go there, except when going to the opponent's middle.Your basic backhand counterdrive should be deep to the backhand corner. This gives you maximum depth, the most table to aim for, and a good angle into the opponent's backhand. A ball that doesn't go wide enough lets your opponent hit a shot without having to move to it, making it easier for him to play a strong backhand or even play forehand.Off a short ball or balls that go to your wide backhand, you can hit your shot even wider, outside the corner. In a topspin rally, a ball that lands shorter is easier to attack than a deeper one, so you should play it more aggressively, while still using great ball placement. Make your opponent move! Yet most players either are not aggressive enough on this shot, or they don't go wide enough – they keep the shot well inside the corners, a poor tactic.A ball hit to a player's middle forces him to decide whether to hit a forehand or a backhand. This often leads to more mistakes, weaker shots, and they have no extreme angle to play into. It also forces the opponent out of position, leaving at least one corner open.When your opponent is out of position on his backhand side (because you played a ball to his wide backhand) you can snap in a quick, often point-winning shot to his forehand. But you must go to his WIDE forehand. Off a short ball, go very wide. When you go to the forehand, try to disguise your shot - don't make it too obvious. (You can even aim one way, then go the other way at the last second.) Also, try hitting it quick off the bounce - don't give him time to react to it.In a game situation, you have to be able to put these shots together in combinations. If you go to your opponent's middle and he returns it with his backhand, he's left his backhand side open. Go for it. If he moves prematurely to cover that open backhand side, go to his forehand because he's already committed his weight in the wrong direction. If he gets the forehand shot back, be ready to attack his now open backhand, or if he moves too quickly again, go back to his forehand.You might also try a tactic of hitting backhands deep to the corner over and over, waiting for a weak return to attack. If your opponent starts edging over to his backhand corner (either expecting more shots to his backhand or possibly to play a forehand), play an aggressive shot to his wide forehand when he's least expecting it. You can also try other tactics, such as mixing up hard and medium shots to break up your opponent's timing.When playing a lefty (or a lefty playing a righty), things are different. Now your basic backhand shot is down the line, though that changes if the opponent has a weaker forehand. From your backhand side, your widest angle is to his forehand and since the backhand is usually a quicker shot than the forehand, you should take advantage of it. Don't hesitate to attack the wide forehand with the backhand, especially if your opponent is slightly out of position or gives you a weak return.When you force your opponent away from the table, don't keep hitting every ball deep to him if he’s consistent off that ball. Mix in a few shorter, softer shots to bring him back and leave him vulnerable to a hard-hit follow-up shot, especially to the corners. You would rarely want to hit two soft shots in a row but to alternate soft and hard is a good tactic, because it brings him in and out. When your opponent is away from the table, he leaves the wide corners open. To keep you from going there, he must keep his shots deep. (But it's often best to attack the middle first, to draw them out of position, and then the wide corner.) Conversely, if you are forced off the table, you must hit your returns deep.If your opponent's backhand is quicker or more powerful than yours, don't try to stay right up at the table with him. Of course, if you back up too much, you'll give him more time to set up plus you'll expose yourself to angled shots. So try to find a middle ground where you can compete with him and seek other shots and tactics to use. Or focus on making sure your first backhand shot is quick and aggressive and try to dominate from there.Remember, while for many the forehand is the stronger shot, you must develop both wings, perhaps relying more on consistent aggressiveness on the backhand and more power on the forehand. If you play both wings well, you gain a huge advantage – and can now dominate most rallies.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3421title: November 7, 2022 - Coming Back or Beating Stronger Playersdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Suppose you are way behind in a game. It's likely that the only way of winning is if you play well and your opponent doesn't. Therefore, assume this is true, and play your tactics accordingly. The same idea can be used when playing a much stronger player - if you can't beat him unless you play well and he doesn't, then assume both, and play your tactics accordingly.In both cases, assume your opponent is going to be inconsistent if he is regularly forced to go for difficult shots, and so you give him those types of shots. At the same time, you assume you will make your normal shots, perhaps with more consistency than usual. Don't overplay - that's the quickest way to blow a lot of points. Find the right balance where you put continuous pressure on the opponent while staying consistent.Confidence is key to both coming back and beating a strong player. The moment you doubt yourself, you'll be hesitant, lose consistency, and won't play well. So just convince yourself you can play well at these times and in these matches, play your game, and let yourself go! (Hint - try doing that in ALL matches.)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3419title: October 31, 2022 - Increase Forearm Snap to Maximize Smashing Speeddate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players have difficulty generating great speed on their smashes. Against lobbers and fishers, they often have to smash over and over and still they can't win the point. Often the problem is lack of forearm snap. To generate great force on the smash, your body has to work together – the legs, hips, waist, shoulders, and forearm, with a weight transfer from your back foot to your front foot. They should work in that order, in smooth progression, at about 70-80% power. (If you use more than that, it becomes a spastic motion, and you not only lose control, you lose power as you are not using all of your muscles properly.) However, it is the forearm snap at the very end that really gives the ball great speed – and is the part that is most often lacking in a weak smash.One way of helping generate forearm snap and the proper timing is to imagine your legs, hips, waist, and shoulders as being used not to increase smashing speed, but to get the forearm going. Then really snap the forearm just before contact. You should sink the ball through your sponge and into the wood. Except against a very high ball (where you can hit the ball straight on), you should still smash with some topspin, so contact is a slightly upward stroke, even against topspin - contact is sort of like an upward slapping motion. Your smashes should all sound about the same, with a loudcrackas the ball sinks into the wood. If the sound varies, then you are contacting the ball differently, which leads to inconsistency. (Some players “smash” with a looping stroke, and for that, it's more of a looping contact with extra topspin, and so less of acracksound at contact.)To develop the forearm snap for smashing, get a bunch of balls and go to the side of the table, near the net. Bounce the ball on the table somewhat high, and smash, using lots of forearm snap. Make sure to keep the elbow down. As you get better, move farther from the net and perhaps bounce the ball lower. (However, against lower balls it's usually better to loop, using the extra topspin to pull the ball down.) If you are doing this correctly, you can smash at full speed and carry on a conversation without missing a syllable.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3417title: October 24, 2022 – Treat Opponents Who Are Not Threats as Threats so They Do Not Become Threatsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:A player isn't a threat to you if, at their best, they can't beat you at your worst. But there's an underlying assumption here that your "worst" is when you are taking the opponent serious and playing your normal game. Often, when playing a weaker player, one is overconfident and so doesn't play hard, or doesn't want to "risk" playing their normal shots, and so plays down to the opponent. This means that your new "normal" is at a lower level than your normal "normal" - and so your new "worst" is now worse than your normal "worst." Result? The player who wasn't a threat to you is now a threat.Some players just look at the opponent's rating, and if it's low compared to them, they don't take the match as serious as they should, whether consciously or subconsciously. Again, they are playing down to an opponent who should not be a threat, thereby turning them into a threat.So take ALL opponents seriously. If it turns out that the opponent is truly a beginner and really, Really, REALLY is not a threat, then you canchooseto go easy. But in all other cases, the best way to make sure a player who is not a threat is not a threat is to treat them as a threat so they are not a threat. Play your normal game - physically, mentally, and tactically.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3415title: October 17, 2022 - The Yin and Yang of Servingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you want to improve, then it's important you develop standard third-ball attack serves - serves that are difficult for opponents to attack and set you up to attack, but usually don't win the point outright except when the opponent is overly aggressive. These are usually short or half-long (where second bounce would be right about the far end-line, sometimes barely off). Most opponents will push them back long, allowing you to loop. More advanced opponents may try pushing short or flipping, but if the serve is done properly and with enough variation, it's tricky to stop those third-ball attacks. The importance for most players to develop their game around such serves cannot be overemphasized - not only do they set up the attack, but over time, they allow players to develop their third-ball attacks (like most top players), and so their attacks (including their footwork to position themselves for it) get better and Better and BETTER. Let us call this the Yin.But there is also the Yang. If you only do third-ball serves, you not only are giving up "free" points, but you are also making things predictable and therefore easier for your opponent. So you should also develop tricky long serves that, if used sporadically, catch the opponent off guard and give you these "free" points, either by outright misses or weak returns. If overused, such serves are susceptible to strong attacks, which is why they should be used sparingly. But if the opponent has to guard against them, then he is less ready to make effective returns of your normal third-ball serves.The most common third-ball serves (Yin) are short or half-long with backspin (often combined with sidespin) or no-spin. (To serve no-spin, use the same big spin motion you'd use when serving with spin, but contact the ball near the slow-moving handle.) As long as these serves are very low to the net, they will usually set up an attack. You can also serve short topspin or sidespin-topspin as a variation.The most common tricky deep serves (Yang) are big, breaking sidespins that go deep on the table, often breaking into the wide corners, though they can also break the other way. Another is fast no-spin, which can catch opponents off guard, especially if done right at the playing elbow, between the forehand and backhand. The more you do these types of serves, the more you develop an instinct for when to use them.Having said all of the above, tricky deep serves can dominate up to a somewhat high level. Even 2000 players struggle returning these serves, if done at a high level and not overusing any one of them. Relying too much on these serves can give a lot of success to a certain extent, but they are limiting, because opponents get used to them, because higher-level players have less problems with them, and because they do not lead to your developing your own game - you instead rely on opponents missing.But the other extreme, relying completely on third-ball serves, while maximizing your own improvement by developing your attack, is limiting as you are giving away "free" points you might have won, and making things easy for your opponent, who doesn't have to guard against these serves. Plus, if you rarely use tricky deep serves, you won't develop an instinct for when to use them.So what's the solution? Find a balance. If your goal is to reach the high levels, focus on third-ball serves, but develop a variety of tricky deep serves as variations. If your goal isn't so high, and you are looking for a "quick fix" to improve your rating or ranking, then perhaps develop your game more around such tricky deep serves. (A small number of players have reached very high levels doing this, but it usually involves acrobatic counterlooping when the opponent loops their serve. Some defensive players also do this.)It's all about finding the balance between Yin and Yang.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3413title: October 10, 2022 - Ten Mini-Fixesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Here are ten "mini-fixes" for little problems you may face as you move up the table tennis rankings.Slippery floors?Put a wet towel on the floor and step on it between points. You've probably seen top players do this; try it, it really works. Also, get new shoes if you are going to play a tournament on a slippery floor.Humid?First, have two towels, one for you, one for the racket and ball. Second, get one of the special sponges designed to dry a damp surface. At Butterfly, they are calledCotton Sponges. (Most major distributors have a version of this.) They really work. Get one, put it in your playing bag, and it'll always be there when you need it.Bad lighting?Close your eyes for ten seconds, then open them, and it will seem brighter. But most important - really focus on watching the ball to the exclusion of all else. Tactically, fast, quick shots are hard to pick up, so look for chances to do that. It's also harder to read spin, so use extreme topspin and backspins, and your spinniest serves.Tired or sleepy?Splash water on your face and it will solve half the problem. (But make sure to get enough rest and sleep next time.)Lost focus or nervous?Clear your mind, and either close your eyes or look at something in the distance for 5-10 seconds. Remember the mindset of the best match you've ever played. Google "Sports Psychology Table Tennis" and lots of useful links will show up. Check outwww.dorakurimay.comLosing track of the score?Make sure the server calls the score out after every point.Having trouble getting a good warmup before a tournament?Arrange in advance to warm up with someone that can give you a good warmup.Didn't play well?Practice and get coaching! If you play better in practice than in tournaments, then play lots of tournaments so you get used to them.Not sure about your tactics in a match?Get a coach or top player to coach you in a few matches. Part of the reason for having a coach is to help you win that match, but it's even more important in learning how to play tactically. After you've played a number of matches with a coach talking to you during and after the match you'll get an idea of what you really should be doing out there, as well as what aspects of your game you need to improve. Once you have a better understanding of what's going on out there, most tactics will become reflexive.Can't find the right equipment?Spend some time trying out lots of different rackets and sponges, borrowing from everyone at your club or (if you can afford it) buy lots of equipment to try out. You need to have a good idea of what's out there before you find the right combination for you. Once you find that right combo, stick with it until there's either a major change in your game or a major new equipment innovation.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3411title: October 3, 2022 - The Larry Linedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many matches are decided in the rallies. The Larry Line (can I copyright that?) is that level of speed, quickness, and spin (done consistently) that overwhelms a given opponent so that they start to either fall apart or are forced to back up and play defensively. Everyone has such a line; if you can find your opponent's and are able to play just above that Line, the opponent will become erratic or be forced to play defensively. The key here is not over-playing by going so far above this Line that you lose consistency. If you play just below it, then the opponent will feel comfortable and won't make many mistakes. Play 1% above it and your opponent will start to miss or make weak returns that you can put away.Here's the corollary - if, instead, your opponent is able to find your Larry Line and you are unable to play above his, then you have to develop alternate tactics. Sometimes you can win because the opponent overplays, going well above your Line, and so makes too many mistakes. (Or, if they are a weaker player, they simply lack consistency whether above or below your Line.) Otherwise, either you play more defensive (usually stepping back to give yourself more time to react), or dominate with serve and receive, with early attacks that end the point before getting into too many losing rallies. But then, once the match is over, go practice to raise your Larry Line - because, if you are like me, you draw the line at losing!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3409title: September 26, 2022 - The Quick Chip Receivedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Often an opponent serves short backspin or no-spin serves to the middle or backhand, and all you can do is push it back. If so, you should develop your flip. But there's an alternative that's often overlooked - a simple quick, deep push to the wide backhand.To do this, you take the serve right off the bounce, aiming it wide to the server's backhand. You can either hit it relatively fast to the wide corner, or (often better) hit it a bit softer (with a slightly downward stroke to keep the ball low), butoutsidethe backhand corner – essentially, you chip it back. Give it a good backspin, though placement and consistency are more important. The result? First, it pretty much takes the server's forehand attack out of play. (If they do step around and forehand loop, next time try the same receive, aiming to the backhand again, but at the last second push it quick to the forehand.) Second, even if they have a strong backhand attack, they will be rushed, angled, and have to move sideways to make the shot. In most cases, since they are being rushed, jammed, and forced to move sideways, their attacks will be inconsistent or weak, along with putting them out of position - and so it's likely they'll just push it back. Congratulations, you've just disarmed their service game!As a corollary, it's helpful to develop your backhand loop as this tactic will often lead to a serve and push to your backhand. A consistent, spinny backhand loop against backspin is a huge weapon as a "four-ball" attack - opponent serves, you chip it to their backhand, they push it back to your backhand, and you backhand loop.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3408title: September 19, 2022 - Blowing Ball in Airdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:We're going to have a little fun this week. There's more to table tennis than just going to the table and relentlessly trying to win. There's also the fun part! And next to lobbing, the funnest thing I do in table tennis is blowing the ball in the air. I know, because it's often what I'm asked to demonstrate more than anything else!!!What am I talking about, blowing the ball?Here's video of the trick,from an interview I did in 2020 with Kevin Nguyen. (The link should take you to 38:45.) Notice that I'm not just blowing the ballup, but I'm blowing itsideways- and somehow, magically, it just floats in mid-air. Here's how you do it.First, learn to do it straight up. To do this, face straight up. (In the video, I'm facing somewhat sideways, but you can't start that way.) Hold the ball a few inches from your mouth. Blow gently, and then release the ball. The key is to find the right distance and how hard you blow the ball, so that when you release the ball, it doesn't shoot up or down - it just stays where you let it go. If you don't get this right, and the ball goes up or down as you release it, you'll lose control. You'll notice from the video that I started blowing first, and when I released the ball, it barely moved.Once you've mastered this, you can move to the next step - blowing the ball sideways. The key here is to blow thetopof the ball. Most think you blow under the ball, but that won't work. If you watch the video closely, you'll see that when I release the ball, thetopof the ball immediately begins to spin away from me, since I'm blowing the top of the ball. This spin causes theMagnus effect- the same thing that makes a topspin ball drop and a backspin ball float (or curve upward if there were no gravity). By spinning the top of the ball away from me, it creates a low pressure area on the top of the ball, and a high pressure area on the bottom of the ball. Result? The low pressure area pulls the ball up, while the high pressure area pushes it up. Result - the ball "magically" floats in mid-air!So . . . get practicing! When you can do it, show it to me (and everyone else) at a tournament!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3406title: September 12, 2022 - Consistency is Kingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Consistency isn't just something you need to learn to do; it's an attitude. It's the idea that, no matter what happens, you can keep the ball in play longer than your opponent. If you convince yourself you can do that, then you no longer are hesitant about your shots, and so your consistency shoots up. Consistency is mostly in the mind. (Plus lots of practice.)You have to practice to develop this consistency. For example, to be a consistent rallier, you need to do practice drills where your practice partner plays all over the table and you relentlessly rally, keeping the ball in play at a good rallying pace.But too often players practiceattack, attack, attack! It's a lot easier to go from consistent rallying shots to consistent attack then to go from wild, inconsistent attacks to consistent attacks. Develop that consistency, and focus on that at each level you reach. This doesn't mean just keeping the ball in play or becoming a blocker; it means that your attacks need to be consistent attacks, as does every aspect of your game.Player after player, as they develop, learn the lesson of consistency. Take 10% off your attacks, focus on consistency (and placement), and your level will shoot up.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3404title: September 5, 2022 - The Simplicity of Tacticsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When you lose a match against someone around your playing level, you didn't lose because your opponent calculated a series of seven shots of varying types, speeds, spins, depths, and placements, all presumably worked out on a blackboard in advance with lots of X's and O's, like they do in football. Nope, table tennis isn't like that. The sheer number of possible tactics is incredible, but individually, each of these zillions of tactics are themselves rather simple.So why did you lose in an otherwise competitive match? Perhaps because your opponent had 1-3 tactics (consciously or subconsciously) that were more successful against you than the 1-3 tactics you used (consciously or subconsciously) against him.The first key is to develop a large arsenal of possible tactics - with variations that increase that number greatly - and have them ready when needed. The second key is learning to recognize when to use which tactics. This takes experience.Guess what? The sooner you start thinking this way, the sooner you'll gain that experience and start recognizing which tactics to use in any given match. Experiment, and don't fret too much about finding "perfect" tactics - find 1-3 thatwork, and don't worry about the other zillion possibilities, many of which may also work. In general, think about what serves and receives set up your attack or favorite type of rallies, and what type of rallying tactics favor your game.Here are some examples of "simple" tactics that were successful, all from the last tournament I coached at.In one match, the key was to attack all three spots - wide forehand, wide backhand, middle (roughly playing elbow) - but look to end the point to the forehand when that side opened up, as it invariably did after a few shots.In two doubles matches, the key was to loop all deep serves, but drop nearly all short serves short - no flipping except as an occasional variation. The opponents in both of these doubles matches were just waiting for the ball to come out to them, so we didn't give them that. By bringing in the opponents, they got in each other's way, so we also played wide angles, to exasperate this. Result?  Two big upsets. (Sometimes the tactic[s] that work in one match work in another!)In another, the tactic was simple - follow the opponent's elbow around and keep attacking it. The opponent had long arms and was very strong from the corners. So we rarely put a ball there.In another, the key was also simple - take shots as quick as possible and take everything to the wide backhand. This was especially important on the return of serve, where I had the player take the ball quick and essentially chip it to the wide backhand. This took out the opponent's very strong forehand while reducing him to playing his weak backhand.In another, the opponent had a very strong backhand, and a willingness to cover much of the table with it. But the forehand was weak. So we went after the forehand relentlessly, never going to the backhand side unless the opponent moved over to play backhand from the forehand side - and then we'd quick-block to the open backhand side, and then go right back to going after the forehand. We also did lots of fast, deep serves to the forehand. A match that started out scary turned into an easy win.So, next time you play, what are the 1-3 tactics you will use?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3401title: August 29, 2022 - Where to Serve Short?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most would say there are three options - short to the forehand, middle, and backhand. (In this context, "middle" means the middle of the table. In other contexts, "middle" means the midpoint between the opponent's forehand and backhand, roughly the playing elbow.) But there really are five, and you should use them all, in varying degrees.Short to the middle. This is the most popular placement at the higher levels because it cuts off the wide angles. It also forces the receiver to choose between a forehand and backhand receive, which can both cause hesitation as well as draw the receiver out of position to play the forehand or backhand.Short to the wide forehand. Some players find the forehand receive against a short ball tricky, and this forces them to do that. Many players also have trouble returning this ball down the line, and so you can serve short to the forehand and know you'll get a crosscourt return. If the receiver has a good backhand flip (often a "banana flip"), then this serve mostly takes it away. If an opponent has trouble with this serve, then you can win a match off this alone. But it gives the receiver a big crosscourt angle, and the wide corner gives them a long diagonal to attack onto - so many players flip this aggressively crosscourt. If you have to cover that against an aggressive receive, you may leave yourself open against a down-the-line receive. Some players have trouble serving short to the forehand, as they have less table. If so, learn to do so.Short to the middle forehand. This is similar to serving short to the wide forehand, but it takes away some of the extreme crosscourt angle and the long diagonal. Also, since many receivers are set to receive against a serve short to the forehand, many find it awkward if the serve instead comes to the middle forehand, where they have may have to move to their left. Those who are used to flipping crosscourt may also find it awkward as their natural crosscourt flip will now go off the side of the table, and so may find it awkward having to aim more into the table. But it means it's easier for the receiver to get to this serve (compared to short to the wide forehand), and it allows them to receive with their backhand if they choose.Short to the wide backhand. This cuts off the wide angle to the forehand, so you can look to attack against crosscourt returns to your backhand. If you have a strong backhand attack, then this will often set it up. Surprisingly, this also is effective for forehand attackers. Since they don't have to worry about a wide-angle return to the forehand, they can edge over and look to attack with the forehand from the backhand side. However, the receive now has a wide angle into the backhand, and they have a long diagonal to attack into.Short to the middle backhand. This is similar to serving short to the wide backhand, but it takes away some of the extreme crosscourt angle and the long diagonal, while still not giving a wide angle into the forehand. However, unlike on the forehand, most receivers have little trouble adjusting between short to the wide and middle backhand, as the wrist is freer on the backhand than on the forehand. This serve is often done by righty players who serve out of the backhand corner (like most do) and makes it easier to keep the ball short while not giving the receiver such a wide angle into the backhand.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3400title: August 22, 2022 - Developing Your Game at Different Agesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Suppose an 8-year-old, a 30-year-old, and a 60-year-old walk into your club, all beginners, and sign up for lessons. Suppose you were their coach. You'd likely start them off similarly, teaching the fundamentals. But something happens after a time - how you teach them begins to change quite a bit. You, the reader, should decide where in this spectrum your game fits, and perhaps discuss it with your coach (if you have one) or take it into consideration when developing your game.For the 8-year-old, you'd soon be teaching him "modern" table tennis - like, say, Ma Long. Once he has the fundamentals down pretty well, he'll likely be taught to stay pretty close to the table, loop from both sides, with feet mostly parallel to the table, even for forehands (except when forced off the table). He'll become a great counter-looper. He'll mostly serve seemingly simple short backspin/no-spin serves - third-ball attack serves - and follow them with loops. (He'll learn other variations, but they will be "surprise" serves, not his core serves that set up his third-ball attack.) He'll learn to attack short serves with backhand banana flips. And he'll be well on his way toward being an elite player, maybe a contender for the National Team or more!!!Many coaches would teach the 30-year-old the same way, but that's probably a mistake. If he's a truly top-notch athlete, then perhaps you would teach him the same way. But in essentially every case, he's not ever going to be in contention to be a National Team Member. His goals are probably to be as good as he can be - perhaps someday a 2000-level player. For this player, you would likely teach him a bit different - more "old-school." He'll learn to loop the backhand against backspin, but in rallies, he might be better off hitting and blocking aggressively. He probably should move the right foot (for righties) back some for forehands, and not try to jam the table when looping. He'll learn to counter-loop, but he'll pick and choose when to do so rather than trying to do it almost every time. He should learn to flip serves but should probably focus more on pushing them back effectively. And while he should develop short backspin/no-spin serves, he'll develop a wider variety of serves, especially deep ones - serves that don't work as well at the higher levels but can be dominant against players under 2000 and often higher.Of course, you should check with the 30-year-old to see what his goals are. He may want to play like Ma Long, in which case you'd coach him the same as that 8-year-old. (You should warn him that he'll need to put in a lot of hours to make up for lost time and have to be in pretty good shape physically.) How about a 20-year-old? He's in between, and depending on his goals and fitness level, you might teach him like that 8-year-old.How about the 60-year-old? Unless he's a super-athlete for his age, he's not going to learn to run around all over the place looping. To reach his potential, it might be better to develop a great blocking game, and perhaps a good smash. He might learn to forehand loop against backspin, but in rallies he should probably mostly hit the forehand. He'll develop the trickiest deep serves he can, though he should also learn to serve short. He might learn to backhand loop against backspin, but often he'll be better learning to push, block, and hit. In fact, if his goal is to be as good as he can be, then (and some won't like this), very often he should go to long pips on the backhand, even early on. That's the dominant style at the older age groups, and there's a reason for it - the long pips is basically an "equalizer," allowing them to better block an opponent's athletic loops and turn all of that topspin into change-of-pace backspin. Another option is short pips, which can help with blocking and hitting.Of course, you should also check with the 60-year-old to see what his goals are. He may want to play like Ma Long - but unless he's in great shape, I wouldn't recommend that as he'd probably hurt himself! But he might want to play with "regular" rubber, rather than face the stigma some long-pips players get, or he might want to play more of a topspin game.In the end, players have to decide what their goals are. I've considered using long pips on my backhand a few times, but I just prefer sticking with inverted, so I win or lose using roughly the same equipment as the large majority of my opponents - plus, as a coach, I'm a better practice partner this way, both in drills and games. But everyone has to make the best choice for themselves!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3399title: August 15, 2022 - Don't Be a Predictable Receiverdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When you receive a serve, you really have three options.You can return the serve passively, so that you rarely miss the serve, but give the opponent the attack. This often means either pushing long or a soft topspin return.You can return the serve in a neutral fashion, where you take away the server's advantage and get into a neutral rally. This often means pushing short or a well-placed flip, often to the backhand.You can return the serve aggressively, where you play riskier shots (and so make more mistakes) but get the initiative. This often means looping long serves and flipping short ones aggressively.You should learn all three types of receives. All can be effective, depending on the opponent. You should probably also specialize in perhaps two of these, so the opponent has to react to both types of receives - while keeping the third as an occasional surprise. For example, against short serves, many top players focus on pushing short or flipping, while using the long push as a surprise. Others push long more frequently, but then catch the opponent off guard by pushing short. Others receive aggressively, flipping against short serves over and over - and then catch the opponent off guard with a short or long push. Find what works for you - but learn all three.By learning all three, you not only have all three tools in your tactical toolbox for use against different styles, but it allows you to be unpredictable - and that is often the quickest way to disarm a server!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3398title: August 8, 2022 - Are You Really Serving Low?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Next time you are at the table tennis club or at a tournament, watch some matches from the side, so you are looking directly along the net. Watch how low the serves cross the net. Do this at multiple tables for players of various levels. You may be surprised at what you see! Most top players will serve relatively low to the net - but there may be some variation there. At the lower levels, the serves cross the net consistently higher.The importance of serving low is often way underestimated. Higher serves are, of course, easier to attack, but the more interesting contrast is between a sorta low serve (often attacked) and a very low, almost net-skimming serve (very hard to attack). But serves that aren't low to the net aren't just easier to attack; they are also easier to push aggressively.Some top players have seemingly simple serves, often mostly serving backspin or no-spin serves. But what makes them effective is they are served very low to the net, so the receiver can't make an effective or consistent attack. And so the server knows he'll likely get a passive return to attack. Others may have trickier serves, but because they aren't net-skimmers, they are easier to attack - and the server can't rely on getting a ball to attack as often. Here is a Tip that might help,Serving Low.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3396title: August 1, 2022 - Serving - The Trick Part of Table Tennisdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Serving is considered the "trick" part of table tennis, and this is where you can be most artistic. While you don't want to rely too much on trick serves to win, having a few tricky ones really helps - both in scoring a few "free" points and making your other serves more effective since they have to guard against those "trick" ones. (If overused, receivers get used to these "trick" serves and often find them easier to attack then simpler serves, such as short, low ones that set up a third-ball attack.) "Tricky" serves are often long and spinny, but may also be fast and dead, which opponents often put in the net.If you don't have a few tricky serves to throw at an opponent, and the opponent does, guess who is at a disadvantage?However, most serves should be "third-ball" serves that are difficult for opponents to attack and set up your own game, usually some sort of attack. (Most should be short, and yet long enough so that the second bounce would be just inside the end-line. At lower levels, you can serve long much more.) But even third-ball serves can and should be tricky. Try varying the swing and especially the follow-through right after contact. If you are serving backspin, follow through with an exaggerated upward swing; if you are serving topspin or sidespin, follow through with an exaggerated downward swing. Use quick motions to make it tricky for the receiver to pick up the racket direction at contact. If you serve no-spin, use a big, exaggerated motion and maybe even grunt on contact.Don't serve just to put the ball in play; the serve should put pressure on the opponent, set up your shots, and win you some free points!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3395title: July 25, 2022 - Develop an All-Around Gamedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Long ago, I used to coach developing players to return serves aggressively. But then I noticed something - players who did that often never learned to handle the opponent's attack as well, while those who were more willing to push serves back long as they developed became comfortable when the opponent attacked, whether blocking or counter-attacking. And if you watch the top players, you realize that while they are mostly better on the attack, they are all comfortable whether attacking or reacting to the opponent's attack. At all levels, the difference is not just who attacks better, but who reacts to the opponent's attacks better.At higher levels, players often flip or push serves back short, using long pushes as a variation. But that only comes after years of developing control by pushing long and by handling the opponent's attacks. If you aren't comfortable when the opponent attacks, then instead of avoiding it, develop that part of your game - push serves back long, let the opponent attack first until you are comfortable dealing with their attacks. (The reverse is also true - if you are comfortable pushing and blocking, but not with attacking, then that's what you should be working on.) Once you are comfortable with an opponent attacking, then perhaps focus more on taking the attack, perhaps by flipping or pushing short.The conclusion here is that you need to develop a solid, all-around game if you want to reach your potential. This doesn't mean 50% attack, 50% defense; it means being comfortable whether attacking or reacting to the opponent's attack in some way. (Usually that means defending, such as blocking, but it also means counter-attacking, such as counterlooping.) When you have such a solid, all-around game, then you will have no major weaknesses – and your level will shoot up.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3393title: July 18, 2022 - Contact Point on Racket When Servingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When serving, many players contact the ball on their racket in the same location each time. Many aren't actually aware of what part of the racket the contact is on. They are dramatically limiting their serves by not understanding how varying the location of contact can vary the spin. Here are some basics.For maximum spin, contact the ball toward the tip. That's the fastest moving part of the racket as you put your wrist into the serve. (This assumes your elbow or wrist are the axis of rotation. This changes in #3 below.)Using the same motion, contact the ball at the base of the paddle, near the handle. This allows you to use the same big spin serve motion and get little or no spin. This is especially effective for backspin and no-spin combinations - if you contact near the tip with a downward motion (under the ball), it's backspin, while contact near the handle is no-spin. Opponents will often read the no-spin as backspin and pop it up. After a few no-spin serves, they adjust – and then they read the backspin as no-spin and put it in the net.For most serves, your elbow is the axis of rotation at the start of the serve. As you are about to contact the ball, the wrist becomes the axis of rotation. Just before contact, you can also rotate the racket so that the axis of rotation is toward the middle of the racket. This means you get opposite spins depending on which side of the racket you contact the ball on. This allows you to use the same motion and serve either backspin or sidespin/topspin. For example, with a forehand pendulum serve, you can serve so that, at contact, the tip is moving down (giving a backspin), but the area near the handle is moving up (giving a topspin or sidespin). It takes practice - have a coach or top player help you with this.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3391title: July 11, 2022 - Five Ways to Force an Opponent Out of Positiondate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the best ways of winning a point is to force an opponent out of position. There are many ways of doing this. (Many start with serve.) Here are some of the best! (Note that "middle" means the transition point between forehand and backhand, roughly the playing elbow.)Attack middle, then wide to corners. If the opponent covers the middle with his forehand, then he leaves his wide forehand open, and vice versa if he covers the middle with his backhand. In both cases, some players over-react in an attempt to cover the open corner, in which case it's the other wide corner that's left open.Short to forehand, long to wide backhand, or short to backhand, long to wide forehand. This brings the player over the table, allowing you to jam them on the other wide corner. This is especially effective when going short to the forehand, long to wide backhand, but both can work.Go to a wide corner twice in a row, taking the second one quicker and wider. After a player covers a wide corner, he often moves back quickly so that he can cover the other corner - leaving the just vacated corner open. (This especially works when attacking the forehand twice in a row.)Short to middle, wide to corners. This forces the opponent to decide whether to return forehand or backhand. If he returns with the forehand, he leaves the wide forehand corner open, and vice versa if he returns with the backhand.Aim one way, go the other way. This is one of the most under-used tactics. Most players react to your first motion in a direction, and if you then change and go the other way, you catch them going the wrong way.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3390title: July 4, 2022 - Consistent Contact Leads to Consistencydate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:There's a stereotype of Chinese table tennis coaches that they often do just two things during a practice session - watch the player's feet and listen to the contact. (I often do this as well.) The latter tells the coach if the player is making good contact. Top players contact the ball consistently the same way for each given shot, which leads to consistency. Developing players do not have this consistency, and so their contact varies - and their contacts sound different.While a coach can hear this difference, as a player you should be able to feel it. When, for example, you loop a ball at a certain speed and spin, it should both feel and sound the same every time. The same is true for other shots, such as blocks. With experience, you should be able to recognize the feel of a good shot - and the feel of a mishit. Focus on the ones with the right feel and strive to replicate itevery time.We all have watched top players, but perhaps next time try listening?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3389title: June 27, 2022 - What Is the Playing Style You Are Trying to Develop?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you don't know where you are going, it's tough to get there. This is true of any journey, whether it's Lewis and Clark exploring the American West or Ma Long on his way to becoming the best player in the world and possibly in history.So, what is your playing style and levelnow, and what do youwantthem to be? That is your journey. It won't happen by itself any more than Lewis and Clark could start their journey without knowing where they were going. Sure, there is always a lucky one (Columbus looking for Asia and accidently finding America), but that's a risky way of doing it. Instead, imagine where you want to be with your game, both in terms of style and level. Perhaps watch other players at your club or world-class players on video to inspire you on how you want your game to develop. Be clear in your mind what techniques you need to develop to get there - and start practicing.A journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step; a journey to a strong table tennis game begins with a single practice stroke.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3387title: June 20, 2022 - 1% Hesitation = 100% Missdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:In practice, it often seems easy. There's no pressure, no worries, just you hitting the ball over and over. It's easy to get into a consistent rhythm. Then you play in a tournament, and while you are perhaps a little nervous, you don't think it'll affect you too much. Maybe you'll hesitate 1%, but that means you're 99% as good as in practice, right? Wrong.You probably have had the experience where something you do consistently in practice fell apart in a tournament. It's exasperating - you almost want to pull your opponent aside after the match and explain to him how much better you are then you were in that match. But what really happened?Table tennis is a sport requiring hand-eye coordination. In practice, you develop your shots until you are almost a machine. But you probably don't realize just how complex each of the tasks you are doing really is. Imagine, for example, blocking against a loop. In a split second, you have to 1) read the direction of the incoming ball; 2) read the depth of the incoming ball; 3) read the spin of the incoming ball; 4) move into position; 5) get the correct racket angle; 6) hit the ball in the center of the racket; and 7) execute a proper stroke with 8) proper contact. Guess what? If you hesitate even 1%, all of this comes crashing down, and what seemed easy in practice becomes a nightmare in tournaments.How do you overcome this? It really comes down to two things. First, stop worrying about winning or losing, and focus on performance. This takes the pressure off individual points, allowing you to play more freely, and thereby increase your chances of actually winning. Second, if there's a specific shot that you sometimes hesitate on, practice that shot extensively, both in practice drills and in matches against players where you often do that shot, so it becomes so second nature you don't hesitate. Third, play lots of tournaments or similar "big" matches so you get used to playing under those pressure conditions. Because guess what - 0% hesitation = 99% making the shot!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3385title: June 13, 2022 - "Losing Is Not My Enemy. Fear of Losing Is My Enemy."date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:This is my favorite quote from Rafael Nadal, who (as of this writing) has won more Grand Slams in tennis than anyone in history. But I think you'll find that the other two players close to him on this - Roger Federer and Novak Djokovic - would say the same, as would most great players from any sport. In fact, I think you'd find that most top players, when they lose a close one - react mostly in surprise. They were so intent on their performance (i.e. doing the shots it takes to win) that they weren't thinking about the actual outcome. And so, when they do lose, their first reaction is surprise and shock, maybe even disbelief, since losing, something they werenotthinking about, caught them off guard.So, instead of focusing on winning or losing, focus on having a great performance. After a match, separate in your mind your performance and the result, always knowing that if you maximize your performance, you'll maximize your chances of winning.If, for example, you play a great match but lose close to a stronger player, then sure, there's disappointment. But separate your disappointment at losing from what should be satisfaction at your performance. Analyze both why you lost and why you played so well, so you can change the first and repeat the latter!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3383title: June 6, 2022 - What Are Your Strongest and Weakest Links?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Amazingly, many players don't really know how they win or lose most of their points. They have a general idea about it, but often the reality is a bit different than their gut feeling. And so, rather than focusing on how they win or lose most points, and how to maximize the winning ways and minimize the losing ones, they just wing it, and never reach their potential.Rather than spend years in ignorance on something of such importance, why not watch a video of yourself in a few matches and actually count, on paper, how you won and lost the points? Then compile them and see what it says.The data doesn't lie!Once you know how you win or lose most of your points, do two things. First, develop your techniques and tactics to maximize the ways you win points. If you have a strength that dominates, how can you find ways to get it into play? Second, now that you know how you lose most of your points, you can both practice the techniques needed so you don't lose points that way as often, as well as develop your techniques and tactics so you aren't forced to play the type of points where you lose most of your points.So, what are your Strongest and Weakest links?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3381title: May 30, 2022 - Practice Matches vs. Tournamentsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Practice matches are exactly that - practice. That means you should play them so as to maximize how much practice you get from them - meaning maximizing your improvement from them. This means several things.Play practice matches as hard as you play tournament matches. If you don't play them seriously, then you won't be able to practice the mental or physical skills you'll need when you play tournament matches.Play them for practice. This means playing some matches exactly as you'd play them in tournaments, so as to maximize your practice for how you should play in a tournament. But you should also use them to practice the techniques you need to develop. For example, if you have trouble counterlooping, and so avoid counterlooping in practice matches, then you'll never develop your counterlooping skills in a match situation.This is your chance to practice the style you are trying to develop.Don't worry about winning or losing; worry about how you played the game. Did you maximize your practice (good) or maximize your chances of winning (sometimes good)?To give an example of the difference between a practice match and a tournament match, I'll use a player I used to play named Paul. I was rated a little higher than him, but he had one skill that he did a lot better than me at the time - he was a great counterlooper. So, when we played practice matches, we had lots of counterlooping duels. My counterlooping got better and better . . . but he always won, since we were playing his game. Then we played in a tournament - and this time I stayed mostly right at the table, only occasionally counterlooping. I won easily. Result of all this? My counterlooping game greatly improved, and I not only held my own when I did counterloop with Paul, but it was much better against others as well.So, next time you play a practice match, think about what type of practice you need and what type of game you are trying to develop, and go to it!!!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3379title: May 23, 2022 - Rushed Backhand Loopdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the biggest differences between forehand and backhand looping is that, for the forehand, the body isn't in the way. This means it's relatively easy to take the ball early, middle, or late in your hitting zone. This makes timing a lot easier.On the backhand, the body is more in the way, and so you can't adjust the contact point as easily. This means that if you are rushed, you can't that easily just take the ball late. Result? Many players get jammed on the backhand, perhaps by a quick, deep push, and so rush their backswings. Result? Lots of erratic misses.Early racket preparation is key to the backhand loop. If you hold your racket too high, you won't have time to bring it down into position. If you stand too jammed to the table you also won't have time. Instead, find the perfect ready position for yourself, where you hold the racket low enough so you don't have to rush, and not so close to the table that you get jammed. (Arm's length is usually about right.) You should be able to bring the racket down and back in a smooth motion, and then whip it through the ball, giving the ball an arcing topspin - just like the pros. At the back of the backswing, the racket should actually come to a brief stop as the rest of the arm begins its forward motion (with the arm and elbow pulling), leading to that whiplike motion as you put the racket through the ball, almost like throwing a frisbee in a slightly upward direction. If you don't feel that slight hesitation as your racket reaches the back of its swing, then you are rushing your backswing.Some of you don't have a backhand loop. Then, may I suggest developing one?Note that everything here should also be hints on the reverse - how to play a player with a good backhand loop. In particular, this means rushing him with quick, deep pushes, and bringing him in with short serves and pushes and then jamming him with deep pushes.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3377title: May 16, 2022 - Never Decide If You Have to Movedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:There are so many snap decisions a player has to make while playing that it's mind-boggling that players often increase the mind-load by adding unnecessary decisions. In table tennis, there is never a decision on whether you have to move; youalwaysmove - or more specifically, you alwaysassumeyou have to move. Maybe once in a hundred shots you might not have to actually move, in which case youprepareto move and simply don't. The huge bulk of the time youwillmove,even if it is one inch,if you want to play your best shots instead of awkwardly adjustingwhilereaching.So, for now on, ban any thinking about whether you have to move. The only decision is in what direction and how far. As the opponent is hitting his shot, flex your knees slightly, perhaps even do a tiny bounce, and finish set to move in either direction as the opponent is hitting his shot. (Watch video of top players to see how they do this - don't watch the ball, focus on one player, and for this, just watch his feet.)Remember, in table tennis, you aren't an oak tree; you are a squirrel scampering about the court!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3375title: May 9, 2022 - Playing the Middle Doubles the Opponent's Difficultiesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Beginners play to the middle forehand and middle backhand. Intermediate players play to the corners. Advanced players play the wide corners andthe middle. Which are you?Assuming you want to be an advanced player, you will learn to attack the middle. The middle is not the middle of the table - it's the mid-point between the opponent's backhand and forehand, the transition point where he has to decide whether to play forehand or backhand, and then move to do one or the other. (You usually go there when attacking, but sometimes even a push to the middle is effective.) Covering the middle is generally the most awkward shot in table tennis, where you have to make a snap decision (forehand or backhand?), make an often awkward move to get into position, and then, after hitting the ball, try to get back into position before the opponent exploits the corner you moved away from.But it's worse than that. If you play the corners, the opponent has only two options - move left or move right. Even in a fast rally, many opponents can cover those shots consistently. If you also play the middle, some think it means the opponent now has three things to cover. WRONG! They now have FOUR things to cover: the two corners, the forehand from the middle, and the backhand from the middle. It doubles the number of shots they have to prepare for. Worse, while going to the forehand or backhand is an easy decision if the ball is going to the forehand or backhand, covering the middle means that awkward split second while you decide what to do. So the opponent not only has twice as many things to cover, he has to make that split-second decision that he didn't need to make if you only play the corners.So, do you want to make things easy for your opponent? Keep going for the wide corners, and you'll do well. You'll just never be as good as you could be.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3374title: May 2, 2022 - Don't "Go For a Shot" or "Play Safe" - Just Do the Right Shotdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When you decide to go for a shot, or play safe, it usually (not always) means you've thrown tactics and percentages to the wind. If you decide to go for a shot, or play safe, is it because it's the tactical and high-percentage thing to do? Or is it more an emotional thing?With experience, players successfully play by "feel," where instincts built up over years of play tell them when to "go for" a shot and when to play "safe." But those instincts were built up based on tactical probabilities - over those years they instinctively learned when to do each to maximize their chances of winning. For example, they learn when to be aggressive when returning serve, when to play safe, and when and how to mix it up.But many players simply make the decision to go for shots or play safe. This often happens when a player is nervous and so can't really think clearly. They may mindlessly go for shots or are afraid to play aggressively and so play safe, even if it's not the smart thing to do. Examine your own game and habits - do you do these things at the right times for the right reasons?To go back to the title of this tip, you shouldn't think of yourself as "going for a shot" or "playing it safe." If you think you have to go for a shot, that implies it's a difficult shot, which is a quick way to get nervous under pressure and miss. If you think you have to play safe, that implies you aren't able to attack effectively, which is also a quick way to get nervous under pressure, especially if you have to attack on some shots. Instead, just think of it as always trying to do therightshot in any particular situation, and the pressure goes away even as the percentages move in your favor. If that means attacking ("going for shots") or pushing ("playing it safe") then so be it - because,in that situation, it was therightshot.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3373title: April 25, 2022 - How to Stop a Simple Third-Ball Forehand Attackdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:A common tactic for forehand loopers with good footwork is to serve short (often to the middle, to cut off the extreme angles), and when the receiver predictably pushes long to the backhand, the server simply steps around and forehand loops - either winning the point immediately or dominating the rally from the start. Often a player can even make a really good, deep, heavy, and low push to the wide backhand, and still the server dominates with his forehand. How can you stop this?The problem, of course, was that while the push was "good," it was predictable and very loopable. Here are ways to improve and vary the receive and stop the attack. (Most of these are also effective in stopping a strong backhand loop.)Make sure the long pushes really did go very wide to the backhand so opponent has to move more. Often a player thinks he's pushed wide, but the push is actually well inside the backhand corner. Push to the wide corner or even outside.Push quicker off the bounce so as to rush the opponent.Load up the backspin.Long pushes should go as long as possible, to jam the opponent. Players sometimes think they've pushed deep, but their pushes actually land one or two feet from the end-line.Aim to the backhand and at the last second quick push to the wide forehand to catch the server off guard.Aim to the wide forehand and at the last second quick push to the wide backhand. This freezes the opponent as he thinks he has to cover the wide forehand, leaving his backhand open. A very simply way to disarm or at least hinder the server.Learn to push the serve back short, so that (given the chance) it would bounce twice, and opponent can't loop it. This is more common at the more advanced levels, as it takes touch. But you can't develop that touch unless you develop it by practicing and using it. Once developed, it's a huge weapon, and still the most common receive against most short serves by most world-class players, along with backhand flips.Learn to flip the serve, to the wide backhand, wide forehand, and middle (opponent's transition point). Against a server that wants to follow with a forehand, you would flip to the wide corners. This could be several bullet points but learn to flip both backhand and forehand. Note that many players find backhand flips easier - if so, then there's no reason why you can't step over and backhand flip short serves even to the forehand, as long as you step back quickly.Finally, mix things up. Use all types of short and long pushes, and flips.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3371title: April 18, 2022 - Keep the Ball to the Extreme Angles in Practicedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:I remember something USATT Hall of Famer Ricky Seemiller once told me at one of my first training camps: "Amateurs practice to the middle forehand and middle backhand. Top players practice to the wide angles." What does that mean? Many players get in the habit of warming up and practicing their shots to exactly what Ricky said - the middle of their partner's forehand or backhand sides, rather than the corner. Watch them warm up forehand to forehand or backhand to backhand, and you'll see their shots, on average, are 6-12 inches inside the corner.What you practice in practice you will do in games.Top players don't generally practice or play to this area - why would they make things easy for their opponents? Even when warming up with simple forehand to forehand or backhand to backhand, their shots will average right over the corners, going wider than the corners about as often as inside the corners. Do the math - it means opponents have 1-2 feet more table to cover, but more like 2-3 feet since shots to the corners are usually crosscourt and angling away. That's a lot of table in a fast-paced game like ours.I'll say it again: What you practice in practice you will do in games.So, next time you warm up or practice, focus on keeping your shots to the forehand or backhand to thewideforehand andwidebackhand. With a few exceptions, essentially every shot you ever do should go one of three spots - wide forehand, wide backhand, and the opponent's middle (the transition between forehand and backhand, usually around the playing elbow). Since those are the places you should be playing at, those are the places you should be going to when warming up or practicing.I'll say it one more time: What you practice in practice you will do in games.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3369title: April 11, 2022 - Do You Receive to Set Up Your Game?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most players learn early on to serve to set up their game. However, many do not do this with their receive. They will instead focus on just getting the serve back in the most consistent way they can that doesn't too easily set up the opponent. This works to an extent, but it's not utilizing your receive as well as you could.If your game is centered around looping, then you want a deep push when possible. Then why are you taking the safe way by pushing long, thereby letting your opponent loop, and take away your own loop? Instead, learn to push short, which will often cause the server to push, usually long. Then you get to loop!Similarly, if you are good at looping against a push, why would you flip too many serves? It takes the deep push out of the rally.If you are a strong rallier, then you want to get into topspin rallies where your opponent isn't dominating from the start. Then you might want to focus onconsistent, well-placed flips to get into such rallies, while mixing in long pushes that might force weak or inconsistent opening shots.If you are stronger on one side (such as the forehand), then attacking a serve to a wide corner opposite your strength often forces a crosscourt return to your strong side. But it depends on the opponent - aggressive returns like this also allow the opponent to make a quick return to your weak side.If you are equally strong on both sides, then perhaps you'd want to flip the serve to the middle, which takes away the extreme angles on the return. Then you just stand ready to attack from both wings, with your opponent already out of position from having to play a forehand or backhand from the middle.Similarly, think about both your game and your opponents' games, and figure out what are the best receives for you. Remember that all receives should do one of the following: Be extremely consistent (but likely allow the opponent to attack); be neutralizing (so you take away the server's advantage, but don't really get an advantage); or aggressive (where you get the initiative, but make more mistakes receiving). Which mix of these receives best fit your game?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3367title: April 4, 2022 - If You Get Caught Out of Position, Either You Made a Mistake or Your Opponent Did Something Greatdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Invariably, when a player is caught out of position and so can't get to a ball, they think they are slow. I know players who voice this regularly, constantly yelling, "I'm too slow!" Sometimes I correct them, but usually I just shake my head slowly. Almost always the problem wasn't that they were too slow, but that their previous shot left them off balance or out of position. What does this mean?Suppose a player steps around to play a forehand from the backhand. Done properly, the player should literally follow through back into position. If you don't, you are doing it wrong, and that's why you are "too slow!" to cover the wide forehand.Other times a player is rushed in stepping around the backhand to play this forehand, and so ends up following through to the left (for a right-handed player), and so can't recover in time to cover the wide forehand. Again, they yell "I'm too slow!" But even here, the problem isn't being too slow; it's either they chose the wrong time to step around, or they didn't recover properly. Even when not rushed, many players finish off-balance, and so can't recover quickly. Instead, you should follow through onto your left foot (again, for righties), and use the weight on that foot to immediately and smoothly push yourself back into position..It's not just stepping around the backhand to play forehands. You also have to play forehand or backhand when the opponent plays shots to the middle, and that puts you out of position. If you don't follow through back into position, or if you finish off-balance, you'll be vulnerable to an aggressive shot to the corners.Placement also counts. If you step around your backhand to play a forehand, if you go down the line you give your opponent an angle into your wide forehand that you likely cannot cover. So you should only go down the line if going for a winner or with a slow loop that allows you more time to recover. Instead, in that situation, mostly go crosscourt wide to the backhand, or to the opponent's middle.Occasionally, of course, an opponent will simply make a great shot that catches you out of position. If that happens, accept that he made a great shot and focus on making sure it takes a great shot to catch you out of position.If you truly have a physical handicap that honestly makes you too slow (including extreme age!), then that's a separate issue - but then you should focus on staying in position, except perhaps when stepping around to end the point with a forehand. But even here, you should focus on positioning and balance so that you don't end up yelling "I'm too slow!" when in fact you should be yelling "I'm so out of position or off balance!" Doesn't have the same ring, does it? So next time, why not just yell, "Positioning!"===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3365title: March 28, 2022 - Pavlovian Response and Table Tennisdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:In last week's tip I wrote about toweling. In it, I mentioned the Pavlovian Response, also calledClassical Conditioning.It's not just towel breaks. You should develop the same routines before matches, and before every point, both serve and receive. If you do so, you'll develop that Pavlovian response that prepares you for the match or point.Watch the top players in any sport and you'll see they have routines that prepare them for what they are about to do. Perhaps the best example is watching a major league baseball player before he bats. Watch a few of them and you'll see they each have their own routine in both the on deck circle before batting, and before every pitch. It's not only a physical preparation, it's a Pavlovian preparation that prepares their subconscious.There are many routines. Watch the top players, especially when they are about to serve, and you'll see theirs. The most common one is bouncing the ball on the table.Here are my routines. Before a match, I jump up and down a few times to physically and mentally prepare myself. Then I stare off at something in the distance for ten seconds to clear my mind, and I'm ready. (Many top players play music before a match to prepare - some have the same music each time. I remember when a number of players used to prepare by listening to Rocky music!)When serving (usually my forehand pendulum serve), I always start by pulling up my playing arm sleeve with my non-playing hand; then I put my non-playing hand with the ball just behind the table; then I bounce the ball on the table a few times; then, most importantly for me, I swing my playing arm back and then forward one time. This prepares me for the serve; if I skip any of this, everything seems off. But as long as I follow the routine, I'm in the zone whenever I serve.For receiving, I always start two steps back, with my non-playing arm up to let the server know I'm not ready. I lower my head; then I raise it, and step forward to the table into my ready position. I wait about one second and then lower my arm, and I'm mentally ready to receive.What's your Pavlovian Preparation?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3363title: March 21, 2022 - A Table Tennis Player's Guide to Towelingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:According toThe Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, "A towel is about the most massively useful thing an interstellar hitchhiker can have." The link above gives some of the many ways a towel helps, such as (I'm not making these up!) "use it to sail a miniraft down the slow heavy River Moth; wet it for use in hand-to-hand-combat; wrap it round your head to ward off noxious fumes or avoid the gaze of the Ravenous Bugblatter Beast of Traal (such a mind-boggingly stupid animal, it assumes that if you can't see it, it can't see you)" and so on. But amazingly, Douglas Adams left out the value of towels in table tennis.Let's start with the obvious: you use a towel to wipe sweat away and to wipe your paddle and the ball off. (If it's humid and you sweat a lot, ideally have two towels, one for you, one for your paddle and the ball.) But there's another huge reason to have a towel in table tennis, and it's not so "You can wrap it around you for warmth as you bound across the cold moons of Jaglan Beta."The other reason for a towel is so you can towel off every six points. You might way, "Why do I need to towel off if I'm not sweating?" Putting aside the question of why you aren't sweating (you should if you are playing the Olympic Sport of Table Tennis), there's a more practical reason. It gives you an ongoing habit that allows you to take a mental break, clear your mind, and focus. If you do this regularly, it becomes part of your routine, and really helps the mental aspect of your game in aPavlovian way. Your subconscious is no different than a dog's in this. (Besides coaching table tennis, I'm a writer, and I also use Pavlovian techniques - after many years of doing so, all I have to do is drink a Dr Pepper and I go into writing mode.) When I coach players, I'm always harping on making towel breaks a habit.The game is more mental than physical and taking that towel break is an important mental weapon.Take it!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3361title: March 14, 2022 - How to Learn by Watching the Top Playersdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most players who watch top players playlook like this. That link should take you to a 22-second video of five cats looking side to side as they watch a ping-pong match. Those cats are enjoying the epic match they are watching, but they are not learning anything. All they are seeing is a little ball go back and forth.Instead, zero in on and watch one of the players and what he does. Focus on specific things - the feet, positioning, serve, receive, strokes, placement, shot selection, etc. Ideally, watch a game several times, each time focusing on something different. That way you can really learn what the top player was doing, and learn from it. If possible, watch parts in slow motion. For the tactical aspects, think aboutwhythe player did what he did, and how that might relate to your game. For the technique aspects, get up and shadow-practice what you saw. If the player you are watching can do it, so can you!!! (At least you can strive to, and you'll get a lot better that way then if you don't. It's a lot easier learning new things by shadow-practicing first without the ball, and then later working on it at the table with the ball.)If you just watch the match as a spectator, all you really see is a ball going back and forth, back and forth, back and forth . . .nice kitty!!!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3359title: March 7, 2022 - Be Both a Machine and an Artistdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:It's great to develop great mechanical proficiency like the top players, who often seem to play like machines. As noted in last week's tip, "They make even difficult shots with such seeming ease and consistency that they make it look easy." But while you are developing that mechanical proficiency, you can be an artist as well.Instead of blindly looping, driving, blocking, or whatever every shot, sometimes throw in something more creative. Throw an opponent off by hitting a softer shot. If an opponent backs up, drop one short. Aim one way then go to another spot to catch the opponent going the wrong way. Throw a sidespin shot at the opponent - perhaps a sidespin loop or sidespin block, or sidespin a serve back. Or maybe a chop block. Vary the spin on your shots, especially loops and pushes. Throw an occasional chop at the opponent, maybe even a no-spin chop that they'll loop off. All of these variations are the "trick" part of table tennis, where you artistically do something to mess up the opponent other than just pounding him into commission with sheer power or consistency.Even Ma Long, now considered by most as the greatest player of all time with his two-winged power shots (and perhaps the greatest forehand of all time), is known for throwing in chop blocks that tie opponents up in knots, as well as great placements with his attacks. Jan-Ove Waldner, the player most commonly called the greatest of all time before Ma Long, developed much of his game around throwing opponents off with his constant shot variation and changing of pace, spin, direction, and depth. Ma Long is a machine who can also be artistic; Waldner was an artist who was also a machine.So, are you a machine or an artist?Be both!!!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3357title: February 28, 2022 - Be a Machine But Not Mechanicaldate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the most impressive things about top players is their machine-like proficiency - they make even difficult shots with such seeming ease and consistency that they make it look easy. They are like well-oiled machines. This is why coaches have players do so much rote practice, practicing their strokes and footwork until they can do them in their sleep. All players should strive for this mechanical proficiency.At the same time, you don't want to have the dreaded case of being "too mechanical." This means that you have seemingly perfect strokes, but don't adjust to variation well - and so make many mistakes if the opponent varies his shots. Ironically, this is almost the opposite of mechanical proficiency!There really are two things here: having perfect or near-perfect strokes that you can repeat over and over against predictable shots, and being able to adjust to variation. You need both. (There are also players with bad strokes but who can adjust to variation - and so they tend to be consistent but their shots are not as strong, or they lose consistency if when they play aggressively or when forced to play at a fast pace.)How do you develop both mechanical proficiency and consistency against variation? This will sound rather obvious, but you do so by practicing. Many players only do rote drills, where every incoming shot is predictable, and so they develop mechanically perfect shots as long as the opponent is predictable. You need to also do match-type drills, where you add variation to the drills and so have to adjust. There are zillions of possibilities. At its most basic, simply serve and attack, where your partner varies his returns. You may have some restrictions, such as he has to push long anywhere, or he has to perhaps push short or flip to a wide corner, or perhaps flip anywhere. Think about what happens in matches, and work out drills that match your game and what you need to adjust to.One reason for becoming too mechanical is playing the same players over and Over and OVER. You get used to them and only them. Instead, you need to play tournaments and leagues where you play different players, where you are forced to adjust to different styles, strokes, and techniques. It's not a matter of learning to play every style, stroke, and technique - it's a matter of learning thehabitof adjusting.The ultimate goal is to have true mechanical proficiency, against any type of variation - like the top players. Because that is "good" mechanical play - and will turn you into a true table tennis machine!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3355title: February 21, 2022 - If You Don't Spend a Good Portion of Your Practice Developing Overwhelming Strengths, You Won't Develop Overwhelming Strengthsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:This could be the shortest tip I've ever written, since it's all in the rather long title, but I'll elaborate. One of the things I always advise players is that if they don't havesomethingthat threatens an opponent, you can't beat them. It's a simple as that. Therefore, at whatever level you are currently at, you have strengths that threaten other playersat that level. If you want to reach a higher level, you have to turn those strengths into overwhelming strengths, ones that would even threaten those at higher levels - thereby putting you in a position to actually beat those "higher-level" players.So look at your game and decide what are your currentandfuture overwhelming strengths. This not only includes the strengths themselves, but also - and this is key - the techniques thatset uporfollow upthose strengths. Having a great forehand could be an overwhelming strength, but less so if your serves and receives don't set it up, or if you don't have the footwork to get into position to use it. Having great serves could be an overwhelming strength, but less so if you can't competently attack the weak returns. Even a push can be an overwhelming strength - but only if you are also strong at blocking or counter-attacking against the weaker loops they force. And so on.Here's the key point. Once you have a foundation to your game, you really need to start developing overwhelming strengths. You can't do that by just practicing those shots a little each session. Instead, you need to spend a good portion of your practice time developing the things you do that can threaten better players, even the best players - and then, maybe, just maybe, you'll develop techniques that threatens everyone, and ride those strengths to the top!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3353title: February 14, 2022 - The Most Important Technique in Table Tennisdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:It isn't a stroke, a serve, a receive, or footwork; it's the ability to learn and improve. Most players play "in the moment" - they mostly play matches where they play towinnow. They avoid their weaknesses, thereby not improving them; they set up their strengths in the ways they always have, thereby not learning new ways to do so; they try to win with what they currently have, thereby not developing new strengths. They probably use the same serves and receives that they've used for years.There are times when you need to play towin now, such as important tournament or league matches. That's when you play to win, period. But the ratio of timesyou could be developing your game versus when you need towin nowis probably 100-1.This doesn't mean you play mindlessly or without tactics; it means you should often (or always!) play tactics with the techniques you are hoping to develop, so you can develop those techniques in match situations.Many times when players from our junior program play practice matches I'll talk to them, asking why they aren't using the more advanced techniques they have been developing in practice. Invariably they'll say theyare scared to use them. Invariably I respond by asking if they think they have a better chance of learning to do those shots consistently by using them in practice matches, or by not using them in practice matches. I then say, "A practice match is practice, and if you can't use what you are learning in practice, when can you use them?"Take a step back and examine your game. What techniques do you need to develop so you can improve? Imagine what your gameshould be, not whatit is. Then practice to develop those techniques that need developing, and use those techniques in games until they become strengths.Continue to do this every step of the way, for as long as you want to improve. When you decide you no longer want to improve, you can always stop!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3351title: February 7, 2022 - Go After Your Opponent's Weaknesses - But Not Too Much!date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Suppose you push to your opponent, and he has trouble attacking it. Licking your lips, you push to him over and over and he keeps missing. It seems a winning tactic, right?Often it is. But sometimes all you are doing is warming up the opponent's seeming weakness and turning it into a strength. It depends on the opponent, but if he's able to loop or otherwise attack some of your pushes, if you give him enough, he'll probably get better, and then that big tactical strength you had is gone. Basically, you are warming up the opponent until that weakness vanishes, and now you have to find a different way to win. The same is true if you have a serve that gives him trouble and you overuse it until he can return it - and thereby losing that advantage. The same is true of most other successful tactics.Instead, when you find such a weakness in an opponent, space it out so he can't adjust, thereby taking away the tactical advantage you had. Come back to it regularly and at critical points, unless you think he's expecting and waiting on it. But that's usually not the case - usually it's best to come back to what works, even if the opponent might expect it. With experience, you'll gain the judgement of when and how often you should pound your opponent's weaknesses!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3349title: January 31, 2022 - Use Top Players as Models For Your Techniquedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you want to reach a high level of play, then you need a lot of high-level techniques. You don't have to invent these on your own - there are a huge number of top players who have already developed these techniques.Suppose you want to develop or improve your forehand loop. Then find a top player whose technique roughly resembles the way you want to play . . . and copy it!!! (Ma Long wouldn't be a bad choice, but just about any top player would do. Youtube is your friend, as are table tennis pages that post such videos.) Similarly, for every technique you have, you should have a specific top player that you emulate. That not only helps you improve your shots as you watch and learn how they do it, but also allows you to regroup when your shots are off - just watch the top player do it and you'll be surprised how quickly you'll get your own shot back.This doesn't mean you can't invent a few things yourself. While you should emulate the technique of top players, you can also have a few personalized techniques. You might add something of your own to a serve or some other technique, just to be "different" - which means an opponent has to adjust to something different. (Serves especially are the "trick" part of table tennis, where you can be extra creative.) You might also be creative in how you apply those techniques tactically. But for the large majority of your technique, copy the top players. Those techniques work. That's why they are top players.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3347title: January 24, 2022 - Focus on the Next Pointdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:You've just lost a point. Perhaps a big one. Does it matter? Of course it does! But does worrying or thinking about it help? Not at all, other than registering the tactics that worked or did not work as new data points. As far as you are concerned, the only thing in the world that now matters is thenextpoint. That means thinking tactically and preparing yourself mentally for that next point. And then, as soon as that point is over, guess what? Repeat. The next point is the only thing in the world that matters. Prepare yourself tactically and mentally for it.How best to do this? You can't think about two things at once, so if you think tactically between points, that's what you'll be thinking about. Don't overthink - just go over the most important things, such as what serve to use, and what receives, shots, placements, etc. to favor. Then, before the point is played, clear your mind and prepare for the next point. (Thinking tactically between points allows your subconscious to reflexively do those tactical things during points.)Note that Jan-Ove Waldner, often considered the greatest player in history (well, before Ma Long) considered this his strongest attribute, the ability to completely focus on the next point, to the exclusion of anything else.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3345title: January 17, 2022 - The Most Important Reason for a Match Coachdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:It's an advantage to have a good coach in your corner. They can talk to you between games and during breaks and help you win, both tactically and with sports psychology. They can even do so during the games, often calling out (or whispering) winning advice. But they are often both over- and under-valued. How is this?A coach can only guide you in a match, he cannot do your shots for you. In the heat of a point, he cannot stop play and tell you what your next shot should be. These are things you have to do on your own. A coach can suggest tactics that put you on a winning arc - but you have to execute those tactics or they won't help. A coach can use sports psychology to put you in a winning frame of mind - but that won't help if you can't execute the shots at a high enough level to beat a given opponent. The large majority of tournament matches aren't particularly competitive - just look at the RR results in a typical event and count the percentage of upsets. But in those matches that are competitive, a coach can sometimes make a difference.But there's a missing part to this equation that many miss -the most important part. A coach may help in a given match. But to a player with a learning attitude, a good match coach does much more - he teaches you what types of things you should be doing and thinking about in a match. It may take time to absorb it, but if you are willing to learn, the long-term impact of a good match coach can be far greater than anything he might do in a single match. (Unless, of course, that match is for a big championship!)For example, the players I coach can probably recite many of the things I'm regularly telling them between games: Attack the middle. Use the whole table. Focus on service placement and depth. What type of serves and receives to focus on. What are your go-to serves. How aggressive to play. And so on. But after a time, I no longer need to emphasize these things - because it becomes second-nature to these players!A player I regularly coach in tournaments had a great tournament recently where he had no coach. When I asked him about it, he told me the tactics he had used. And he had a revelation - those were precisely the tactics I'd been harping on when I'd coached him before! Now, when I coach him, we simply need to focus on identifying things we are already looking to identify. He's learned to think tactically - which means he's learned how to win.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3342title: January 10, 2022 - Take the Weird Styles Pledgedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:How many times have you lost a match and complained about how "weird" your opponent played? It could be a different surface that you weren't used to; a strange serve you weren't familiar with; or a weird stroke that gave you fits.If it's a "weird" surface, then adjust to it and learn to play it - with different colors, you always know what side he's using, so there's no excuse to get fooled.In each case, instead of complaining about what the opponent did, you should think about how and why he did those things, and why you weren't able to adjust. And then, give the opponent credit for finding a way to win.The whole point of playing to win is to find ways to win within the rules. If an opponent has found a way to mess you up, then he's done exactly that. He's earned his win, and by not adjusting to whatever he did, you've earned the loss.Think about it. If whatever the opponent is doing is rare, then it's likely an inherently weaker style, or others would be doing it. And so, if you were unable to find the inherent weaknesses in that style and win against it, then you have literally lost to a player who handicapped himself by playing an inherently weaker style!!! Take advantage of his weaker style. If you can't, then you need to look at your own game and figure out why, with such an advantage, you were unable to win. It might be a problem with your technique; with your tactics; or your mental attitude. (Saying you weren't used to it only works for one game; after that, if you haven't adjusted, then it's on you.)So, let's take this pledge: "I will never again complain about an opponent's style." Wasn't that easy? From now on, instead of complaining about losing to a weird style, focus on how tobeatthat inherently weaker style.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3340title: January 3, 2022 - Outcome Versus Processdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:These are not the same thing. Suppose it's deuce in the fifth, and you make two awkward, weak returns that hit the edge.You've won!!!You are so happy. But the shots you did were not good. You should be happy about theoutcome, but unhappy with theprocess.Now supposed at deuce in the fifth you pull off two very nice shots, but your opponent makes a pair of weak returns that hit the edge.You've lost!!!You are so sad. But the shots you did were good. You should be unhappy about the outcome, but happy with the process.If you focus on the process - i.e. your actual shots - then you'll maximize your chances of getting a good outcome. So, learn to separate outcome and process. When you lose, it's fine to be unhappy with the outcome, but you'll learn more if you examine the process, see what you can learn from that, and focus on improving your process, i.e. your game. And that will lead to better and better outcomes.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3338title: December 27, 2021 - Equally Comfortable Attacking or Defendingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players tend to strongly favor either offense or defense. Even at higher levels, many players are very comfortable attacking, but get uncomfortable and inconsistent when the opponent attacks first. At lower levels, it's often the reverse, where they are most comfortable pushing and blocking, and hoping the opponent misses.One of the quickest ways to judge a player's potential is to see if they are equally comfortable attacking or defending. This doesn't mean they are equally good at both - especially at higher levels, most are better when attacking. But if a player is equally comfortable attacking or defending, and so proficient at both, he can go a long way.So, develop a game where, while you might emphasize attacking (though some might emphasize defense), you can do either. It's not just your proficiency - it's also the attitude. If you are comfortable and confident when the opponent attacks first, then under pressure you are likely to handle his shots far better than if you are only comfortable attacking.Learning to attack is straightforward - work with a coach and practice! Learning to defend is the same - have someone attack while you block (or whatever other defensive shots you choose) until you are so comfortable doing this that, when it's time to do it in a close match, it's second nature.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3337title: December 20, 2021 - If You Play to Not Lose, You Are Playing to Losedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:This is a simple one. When a player has a good lead or is playing a seemingly weaker player, they often play to "not lose." This means lowering their own level of play, since they are no longer doing what they normally do. They are literally abandoning whatever gave them that lead or made them the better player, and then wonder why their level drops. This probably leads to more chokes and upsets than any other single cause.Instead, no matter the score or the opponent, play your game. Think tactically about what you need to do to win the next point, and the point after, and so on, using your game and what worked before as your reference. Perhaps put an emphasis on consistency when you have a good lead or are playing a weaker player, but onlyemphasizeit, don't go overboard and turn into a quivering mass of passivity.Play Your Game!!!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3336title: December 13, 2021 - Attacking the Middle is Different and Often Better Than Attacking the Cornersdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:I've written tips on attacking the middle, but it can't be overemphasized how important this is. It's likely the most under-used rallying tactic at the intermediate and even advanced intermediate level. Advanced players don't have this problem - it's usually their go-to spot. What are the advantages of attacking the middle?If they cover the middle with the backhand, you simply go more toward the forehand. And vice versa.When you go to a corner, the opponent instantly knows if he's going to play forehand or backhand. When you go to the middle, there's that split second of indecision as he decides which shot to use, leading to mistakes and fewer aggressive returns.Most players drill mostly from the corners, and so aren't as comfortable playing from the middle.You don't have to guard against an extreme angled return.So, stop middling about and play the middle!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3335title: December 6, 2021 - Bring Proper Equipment and Suppliesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:You've practiced, you've worked with a coach, you've done physical training, you've done mental training... you're ready for the tournament. What could go wrong? Let's see . . . the floor's slippery, so you can't move... it's humid, so the ball is sliding off the racket . . . and the only thing around to eat for lunch were hot dogs, and now you're feeling sick... AAAAAAAHHH!!!Okay, let's calm down and make sure these things don't happen again. Here are some tips.Slippery floors. Make sure to have relatively new shoes before a tournament or big match if you are playing on floors that might be slippery. You might even have a brand new pair of table tennis shoes that you only use in tournaments, and put aside between tournaments so they stay relatively new and grippy. Another solution is to put a slightly wet paper towel on the floor, and step on it between rallies. Or bring a hand towel and wet it. (Bring a plastic bag to store it between matches.) This will make your shoes extra grippy, but only for a minute or so. It's a hassle but it pays off. (Top players rarely have to deal with this problem, at least in big matches, since they rarely play on slippery floors. Most big tournaments these days have special rubberized flooring with just the right amount of grippiness.)Humidity. Use two towels, one for you, one for the ball and racket only. The towel you use for yourself will get damp rapidly and will be useless in drying off your racket or the ball. Have extra towels to replace these when/if they get damp.Food & Drinks. Bring fruit, light sandwiches, and other food items that are high in carbohydrates, but not too high in sugar. Eat small amounts throughout the tournament rather than periodic large meals, although you should have a relatively large breakfast. Drinks such as Gatorade are good, but so is water. Make sure to drink fluids from the start of the tournament, not just when you are thirsty - by then, you are already dehydrated, and slightly weakened.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3333title: November 29, 2021 - How to Get Luckydate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Few things are more frustrating than losing a match because the other guy got a bunch of "lucky" nets and edges. And yes, each of those nets and edges were lucky - individually. But in the long run, certain styles or tactics lead to such "luck." So, how can you get lucky?If you play aggressively, you'll get more edges because your shots will tend to go deep.If you play aggressively to wide angles, you'll get more edges on the side.If you play shots low to the net, you'll get more nets.But there are tradeoffs for each of these. If you play deep, you're more likely to go off the end. If you play wide angles, you're more likely to go too wide and off the side. If you play shots low to the net, you're more likely to go into the net. It's all a tradeoff.In generally, it's good to play aggressively deep and wide. Most players play too safe, and so limit the effectiveness of their shots. Instead, challenge yourself to play these shots more aggressively, as the top players do.However, you might not want to play your rallying shots too low to the net. When serving or pushing, that's when you want your shots low to the net. But once in a topspin rally, you need more arc on your shots for consistency. Even aggressive loops cross the net with a decent net clearance.So, you've got to ask yourself one question. Are you ready to get lucky? Well, do ya, punk?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3332title: November 22, 2021 - How to Fix a Weakness in Your Gamedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Do you have weaknesses in your game, ones that often cost you a match? Of course you do! Everyone does, since weaknesses are relative to your level, and so the weakest parts of your gamearethe weaknesses in your game. (If you improve a weakness to the point where it is no longer a weakness - and thereby improve - than some other part of your game becomes your weakness, relative to your new level.) So, how do you fix these weaknesses? There are three steps.First, you must identify the weaknesses in your game.You might already know what they are. I'll start - the biggest weaknesses in my game were a tendency to be too soft with my backhand in rallies, difficulty in covering my wide backhand, and I struggled with spinny loops to my backhand. (Hmmm, there's a pattern here.) So what about you? There's an easy way to figure out what the holes in your game are - ask your regular playing partners! Table tennis is a collaborative effort and playing partners should constantly be giving feedback to each other.Second, you must fix the weaknesses.How do you do this? Coaching and practice. When I say "coaching," that doesn't always mean hiring a coach, though that's the first thought. You can also ask experienced players for help, or self-coach by watching how others do it. And then, you practice it until it is no longer a weakness in your game (or in some cases, not such a glaring weakness). To use my own example, once I realized I had difficulty in covering my wide backhand, I figured out why - it was because I did so many drills that went to my backhand corner that I'd literally trained my feet to stop once I reached that corner, and so struggled with anything that went wider. By the time I started addressing that problem, I was already more of a coach and was no longer training seriously, and so I never really fixed the problem. But the solution would have been to have practice partners go as wide as possible to my backhand in drills, forcing me out of the comfort zone I'd fallen into.Third, you should learn how to hide the weaknesses in your game.This is a tricky option, since by hiding it, you might not develop it. And yet, no matter what your level is, and no matter how many times you fix a weakness until it is no longer a weakness, there will always be weaknesses in your game, relative to your level. At some point, if you are looking to win big matches, you have to tactically play to win now so as to win those big matches, which means covering up for whatever weaknesses you have at that time. Which means you need to get in the habit of covering for those weaknesses - which means you need to find a balance.???????That might mean playing a little different in many practice matches, where you try to fix the weaknesses, but in more serious matches (tournaments and leagues), and in some practice matches, you find ways to cover for those weaknesses. For example, because I always had trouble with spinny loops to my backhand, my solution was simple - I got into the habit of flipping or pushing short against nearly all short serves. That way I didn't have to push long and face a spinny opening loop, since loops against backspin (i.e. a long push) are spinnier than those against topspin. (When I did face spinny loops to my backhand, I'd often cover up the backhand weakness by trying to step around and smash or counterloop with my forehand every chance I could - both because my forehand was strong against spin loops, and to cover for the backhand weakness.) Of course, it might have been better for me to have just pushed long a lot, so I could practice against those spinny loops! It all comes down to finding a balance between doing what tactically works now (my not pushing long) versus longer-term strategic thinking (pushing long so I'd become more comfortable against spinny loops to my backhand). If I had strategically pushed long until I'd become comfortable against those spinny loops to my backhand, then there would have been some other weakness I'd have to cover up for - and, as noted above, eventually, if I wanted to win big matches, I had to accept that you sometimes have to simply cover up for your weaknesses or you'll forever be exposing your weaknesses . . . and losing.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3329title: November 15, 2021 - Don't Give a Quick Player Too Many Short Ballsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If your opponent is quicker than you, than the last thing you want to do is let him rush you. If you put the ball short over the table, then your quick opponent will be able to hit very quickly at wide angles. So keep most shots deep against quick opponents to give yourself more time. (This is especially true against players who hit quick off the bounce with pips of any sort.)At the same time, don't be so intimidated by quicker players that you play everything deep, thereby being predictable. Deep balls are usually easier to attack then short balls, and if your quick opponent is attacking them effectively, then perhaps start some rallies with a short ball (short serve or short push) to throw him off and bring them over the table - and then go deep.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3327title: November 8, 2021 - Relentlessly Reliable Receives with Systematic Practicedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:"If it weren't for your serves, I'd have won." How many times have you heard or said or thought that? Receive is seemingly everyone's weakness. But it shouldn't. The primary reason why so many people have weak receives is because they don't systematically practice it.If you want to develop your forehand, you practice it. The same is true of just about any other part of your game, from serving to footwork to all the strokes. You'd practice it over and over until it's improved - that's systematic practice. But do you do the same for receive? Or do you just rely on practicing it in game situations, and somehow think that's all that's needed to develop one of the most difficult parts of the game?How do you systematically practice receive? By (drum roll please) systematically practicing it. This means finding a practice partner or coach who serves to you, over and over, so you can (systematically) work on your receive. Have trouble looping a certain type of deep serve? Have your partner serve this deep serve so you can practice against it. Have trouble with a type of receive against a short serve? Have your partner serve it to you so you can practice it. The goal is to make your receive so relentlessly reliable that it not only isn't a weakness, it becomes a strength.It doesn't matter whether your receive is aggressive (where you try to take the initiative, usually with a loop or a flip), neutral (where you nullify the server's serve and turn things into a neutral rally, in a number of ways - a consistent loop, flip, or long or short push, with the short push the most common way at higher levels), or passive (usually long pushes), it should be so relentlessly reliable that the server never gets a "free" point via you missing or popping up a ball and giving him an easy put-away. Even your "aggressive" flips should be toned down for consistency, using quickness and placement instead of overly aggressive and less consistent flips.Once you are consistent against any given serve, have your partner or coach serve everything at you, with the intent to force mistakes. When you have a relentlessly reliable receive against all these serves, you are ready to face them in competition - and you'll never have to say, "If it weren't for your serves, I'd have won.)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3325title: November 1, 2021 - Use Practice Matches to Practicedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Exactly as the heading says - this is the time to try out new things, develop new techniques, and improve your game. If a player has trouble looping, for example, many will fall back on more successful shots in practice - and so continue to have trouble looping. Instead, use those very shots that need to be developed in practice matches so that they will eventually be developed enough to use in more important matches.So, take a good look at where your game is, and where you want it to (realistically) be in the relatively near future. Then play that way in practice until you can do it well.One thing that really helps when trying out new things is to find aweakerplayer to work on using new techniques in a game situation. For example, if you need work on looping against backspin, play games against someone, usually a weaker player, where you can serve backspin, he likely pushes it back, and you get to work on looping against backspin. If you play a strong player, he'll likely make stronger returns (flips, short pushes, or long pushes that you aren't quite ready for yet), and you won't get as much practice. (Plus, the games likely won't be competitive.) Or just play improvised games where the receiver always has to push back long, and then you both get to work on looping backspin!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3322title: October 4, 2021 - Ten Table Tennis Quotes for Improvementdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:"Tactics isn’t about finding complex strategies to defeat an opponent. Tactics is about sifting through all the zillions of possible tactics and finding a few simple ones that work.""Strategic thinking is how you develop your game. Tactical thinking is how you use what you have to win.""Tactical thinking is a habit you develop.""If you couldn't write a book about your game, either you don't know your game, or you have no game.""When you reach a new level in table tennis, it might take time before you win at that level as your opponents are tactically and psychologically used to that level, and you are new to it.""Use in matches what you fear to use. Then you'll get better at it and won't fear to use it.""Develop good serves and try to follow them with an attack. You'll not only have better serves, but your footwork and attack will also improve. It's a triple-whammy.""When you win, learn why you won. When you lose, learn why you lost. Always learn.""When you need to fix a weakness or develop a strength, for a time, focus almost entirely on that.""If you aren't having fun on the inside, you are doing it wrong."===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3320title: September 27, 2021 - Forehand Push for Playing Choppersdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:On the forehand side, when someone pushes long, it's almost always a good idea to loop. Because of this, many players are not comfortable forehand pushing except against a short ball. Against a deep ball, they almost always loop, and that's usually a good thing. The problem is when they play a chopper, where suddenly having a good forehand push against a deep ball becomes important.When playing a chopper, one of the worst things you can do is attack over and over without letup. A chopper wins points on your mistakes, and so he wants you to play too aggressive, thereby making too many mistakes. Instead, it's almost always best to attack one ball, and if the chopper makes a good return against a strong loop - i.e. returns it so you can't put the ball away with relative ease - then you should usually push and start over. When they chop your loop back, you are usually getting much more spin than normal (especially if you loop to long pips), plus it's trickier to read accurately, plus the defender is already standing back there, in position for your attack. So instead of going for another risky attack, just push, bringing the chopper in, and then you can attack again. (This is especially true if they make a good chop return of your spinnier loops. If you loop with only a little topspin - i.e. roll the ball - then you generally get less backspin on the return, and so may be able to keep attacking until you see one to go after. It's a chopped return of your stronger, spinnier loops that you should more often push unless the ball is high.)The problem is that, if you don't have a good forehand push, you'll make lots of mistakes. Matches are often won and lost on this simple shot, since so many attackers aren't comfortable forehand pushing against a deep backspin, and so lose far too many points that way. Or, since they aren't comfortable forehand pushing, they attack against balls where it would be higher percentage to push.You could cover the whole table against a chopper with your backhand push, and many do - but that would mean you have to decide early on whether to forehand attack or backhand push, and so you might make the wrong call. It also means you would be telegraphing early on that you are going to push, and so the chopper can move in toward the table.Instead, learn to forehand push against deep chops. That way, you can wait much longer before you decide whether to attack or push, thereby giving yourself more time to make the judgment, and not letting the chopper know early on which you will do. (In fact, it's often best to cover the entire table with your forehand loop and push against a chopper.) You might also find this valuable against other defensive players, such as a blocker who waits for you to attack - this allows you to push several balls before find the right one to attack. Or you can use it against an aggressive player who doesn't have a strong attack against push.So even if you don't normally forehand push against deep balls, make sure to practice pushing with someone, including that not-as-often-used forehand push! The next time you play a chopper, you'll thank me for it.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3318title: September 20, 2021 - A Good Warm-update_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:A warm-up is different than practice. Practice is to improve, maintain, or fine-tune a technique. Few players improve unless they do lots of this. However, the focus of this tip is on warming up.Warm-up is to groove your shots before playing matches. (You also warm up before a practice session, but that's more to loosen up before serious drilling.) How can you improve your warm-up?Don't go to the table cold. Do some easy jogging and perhaps some shadow practice to warm up the muscles.Especially for a tournament, try to arrange in advance to warm up with someone you are used to practicing with. The partner you choose should be a relatively steady player - you can't groove your shots against someone who hits each shot erratically. Your partner should also be reliable – it doesn't help if he doesn't show up or shows up late when all the tables are taken.You should decide in advance what you need to warm up. Make sure to warm up every major aspect of your game! That means forehands and backhands, crosscourt and down-the-line, looping, blocking, footwork, and so on. Don't forget pushing! Many players will push erratically in a match because they didn't warm it up. Even serves should be warmed up, especially deep ones that can be tricky to pull off if not warmed up first. For most techniques, 2-3 minutes might be enough to warm it up, but take whatever time is needed.A really good warmup, covering everything, takes at least 45 minutes or more, though you can probably get most of it done in 30 minutes. The less time you have, the more you'll have to cut corners. For club play, you might not be able to get all this in unless you come early. Many players simply warm up the basics for maybe 5-10 minutes, and then warm up the rest by playing matches. You can do that, but it might not optimize your play.Finish the warmup by playing actual points. You might start off with common rally types. For example, you might have one person serve backspin, the receiver pushes long, the server loops, and play out the point. At the end, play regular points. Many players leave out this part - and the first time they play regular points is in a real match. Not the best way to prepare!How do you know if you've had a good warmup? You'll feel ready to play. If you don't, then you didn't get a good warmup. And the nice thing is that, cumulatively, these warm-ups not only prepare you for a match, but they also help you improve as you groove your shots.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3316title: September 13, 2021 - A Different Measure for a Match Coachdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:It's an advantage to have a top coach in your corner during a match. They can quickly pinpoint weaknesses of an opponent and come up with tactics that will maximize your chances of winning. They are also good at helping you get into the right mentality for a match.Most players will never have a coach in their corner for most of their matches. But guess what? You don't need a coach ineverymatch, not if you learn from the times that you do. It's still an advantage to have one, but the more you learn from a coach in the matches that he does coach, the better you become in matches where you don't have one.Every coach is different, but in general, they stress some of the same things: what serves and receives to use, what shots to use (including shots to set up other shots), placement, and so on. But when you have a coach stressing these things in enough matches, it becomes second-nature for you to start looking for the same things.If you have a coach in ten matches, and each time he's saying some variation of, "Attack the middle and wide forehand," "attack the middle and wide backhand," "attack the wide corners," "attack all three spots," then pretty soon it's ingrained on you to look for which of these placements to go for against various opponents, keeping in mind that each placement sets up other placements. (For example, attacking the middle often sets you up to attack the wide corner.)Similarly, after ten matches with a coach, you'll start to get an idea for what types of serves and receives to use against different players, and it becomes ingrained to look for which ones to use, in particular what spins, placements, and depths. You'll also get an idea of what's the best mentality to have in a match.And then, guess what? You'll play tournaments without a coach, and do really well. When that happens, some think, "See, I don't need a coach!" Others realize that the reason they did so well without a coach is because theylearnedfrom a coach in the matches where they were coached. And from then on, they'll continue to do well whether they have a coach or not - but it always helps to have a match coach, both for that particular match and as a continued "tune-up" to keep your tactical and mental skills at their maximum.It's no different than any other type of table tennis training. It helps to have a coach work with you when you practice, but that doesn't mean you can't practice without a coach. Similarly, it helps to have a coach in a match, but that doesn't mean you can't play well without a coach. And once you've worked with a match coach enough, then if that coach has done a good job, you'll always have a coach in your future matches -yourself!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3315title: September 6, 2021 - Use Your Strengths, But Test Your Opponentdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:It's wise to approach a match with the idea of using your strengths, but don't forget to test your opponent as well. You don't want to lose a match because you didn't know about a glaring weakness in his game! This is why it's often good to scout out an opponent in advance, or ask other players about him, so you can go in knowing what his weaknesses might be. Ideally, this allows you to play your strengths against their weaknesses. But while it's difficult to win without using your main strengths, you can often win by matching your average shots against his weakness, or even your weakness against his even bigger weaknesses. (I remember once watching two players with big forehands go at it an entire match, backhand to backhand, with each player keeping the ball very wide to the others backhand so the opponent couldn't use his big forehand. So it became a battle of their weaknesses.) So test your opponents - serve long & short with different speeds and spins; test their forehand, backhand, and middle; attack at different speeds; try various types of pushes, and so on. Don't risknotknowing your opponent's weaknesses!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3312title: August 30, 2021 - How To Play Fast-Attacking Junior Playersdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:No matter what your level is, at some point you've had to go up against some up-and-coming junior player. If he or she was your average up-and-coming junior, and you are an average adult, and the two of you were roughly equal in level, then the following was probably true:The junior was faster and quicker than you.You spent much of the match on the defensive, trying to withstand a barrage of fast attacks - many of them hitting, some of them missing.So how can you increase your chances against such a player? You can't match him in quickness. But you can beat him with control and tactics. The key is to use your own strengths but vary your shots enough so the fast-attacking junior can't get into a rhythm. Play solid shots with few unforced errors, force the fast-attacking junior into erratic shots, and you'll take control, even if it seems the kid is taking most of the shots.When Attacking: You don't need to be fast or quick to attack the first ball in a rally. So focus on making steady aggressive shots to start off each rally (such as looping), and force the fast-swinging junior to go for difficult counterattacks. The catch is you have to vary your attack. If you do the same type of attack over and over, the fast-swinging junior will find a rhythm, and his shots will become too strong and steady. You also don't want to turn it into a speed contest, if the junior is faster and quicker. Try attacking at different speeds, at different depths, with different amounts of topspin, and change directions constantly. Down-the-line shots are particularly effective against juniors who often drill too much crosscourt. Aggressive, angled shots give smaller juniors difficulty, as they don't have your reach.When Not Attacking: Play ball control with lots of variation. Fast-attacking juniors have difficulty timing their attacks against varied shots, or against extreme spins. When you loop, focus on lots of topspin, deep on the table. When you push, push very heavy and deep. Both of these tactics will force lots of errors However, many players make the mistake of playing too passive, and giving the fast-attacking junior easy balls. Make sure you choose which balls he gets to attack, and which ones you get to attack. Lobbing is often a good tool against juniors, as is any type of defense, but only when forced to. Even if they can't hit as hard as you, do you really think you have a better chance to win if you let them smash at will? (A small minority of players can say yes to this.) But if you do play defense, the key is also to vary your shots to force mistakes. Juniors are very good against predictable shots and can sometimes get into what seems an unstoppable rhythm. But usually this is because of a lack of variation in the shots they are facing. Don't let this happen to you!Psychology: This is often the most difficult aspect. Remember, the fast-swinging junior plays fast and aggressive for a reason - he's been trained to do this! If he's near your level, and is training regularly, he's a serious threat. Many players, while consciously knowing this, subconsciously play down to junior players with safe, passive play, and pay for it.A final note to fast-attacking juniors: Keep attacking fast and aggressively, but play players who vary their shots as much as you can, and learn to adjust to them. Not only will you get better this way, but you might learn how to vary your own shots and add another dimension to your game.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3310title: August 23, 2021 - Forehand Position for Backhandsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When playing close to the table, you have very little time to make a transition from forehand to backhand shots, and vice versa. If you are playing a relatively quick backhand or in a fast rally, there's no need to go into a backhand stance for this shot. Therefore, learn to play this shot from a slight forehand stance, with the right leg (for right-handers) slightly back. That way you'll be able to make a quicker transition both to the backhand and to the forehand. (You should still rotate the body to the left, allowing you to still play a strong backhand.) It's only when you have more time to play a more powerful backhand (in a slower rally or from further off the table) that you might want to stand more neutral, or even (when you have time) in a backhand stance. Note that even in this slightly forehand stance, if you are facing crosscourt (i.e. crosscourt to the opponent's backhand, assuming both are righties), then you are essentially in a neutral stance anyway, with your body perpendicular to that crosscourt line.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3307title: August 16, 2021 - The Seven Links of Table Tennisdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:There have been numerous discussions over the years over what is the most important part of table tennis. Many say the serve, or receive, or the forehand, or footwork, or consistency, or tactics, or mental strength, and so on. Of course, many of these discussions are like arguing which link in a chain is most important! Also, many of the aspects are related. For example, having a good forehand isn't so helpful if you don't have serves, receives, footwork, and tactics to get that forehand into play.Here are the seven links of table tennis that pretty much covers it all. Note that things like tactics, mental strength, footwork, etc., are all parts of these, but spread over multiple parts. One strength or weakness can lead to strengths or weaknesses in multiple links.Serve. Every point starts with it. Many call it the most important aspect, often the least practiced. It's primary purpose is to set up the best part of your game, usually some sort of attack.Receive. Perhaps the weakest part of most player's games. How often do you really practice it, other than in actual games? The receive can focus on consistency (so make few mistakes, but often give the server the initiative); neutrality (make a few more mistakes, but get into a neutral rally); or aggressive (make more mistakes, but take the initiative). You should be able to do all three of these.Pushing. How many rallies start, usually until someone finds a ball to effectively attack. They can be both long or short pushes.First attack. Both players should be looking for this, even defensive players if the opponent doesn't force the attack. The key is the first attack has to be both consistentandeffective, and well-placed.Defense or Counter-Attack. How you handle the opponent's attack. Blocking is the most common method, but also soft counterlooping, fishing, lobbing, and chopping. Or you can deal with the opponent's attack by counter-attacking with aggressive blocks, counter-hits, or counterloops. Many up-and-coming players develop strong attacks but fall apart when the opponent attacks first. If you want to be good, you need to be comfortable whether you or your opponent attacks first.Continued attack. How you continue your attack after the first one, often against an opponent's block. Consistency and placement are key until you get the right one to end the point.Putaways. Ending the point!!! Smashes and loop-kills.So, how strong are you in each of these links? A chain is only as strong as its weakest link! (That's not technically true in table tennis, of course - a player may get away without a strong putaway, for example, if he has a strong continued attack. But if you are weak in any of the above, it weakens your game.)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3306title: August 9, 2021 - Relax Your Arm During Backswingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Especially when looping, you need a loose arm to maximize power. Many players literally jerk their arm backwards when looping. Instead, relax it into a natural backswing position, and then use the natural elasticity of the muscles to slingshot your arm into your forward swing. Think of your arm as a rubber whip and whip it into the ball with smooth acceleration. You should extend this thinking to the entire body since looping is a full-body shot - with power coming from the legs, hips, waist, shoulder, arm, and wrist - all part of one big whip that smoothly accelerates into the shot. Watch the top players and do what they do!!!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3303title: August 2, 2021 - Practice Service Spin … on a Rug!date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:It's often difficult to judge how much spin you are putting on the ball when you practice serves. Without this feedback, it's not easy to improve your serves. So try this - find a large, carpeted room, and practice serving there. Spin the ball as if you were serving and try to control what it does on the rug. With backspin, make it roll back to you. With sidespin, make it curve sideways, perhaps aiming at targets. (Perhaps have a little fun by having it curve around objects.) Keep working on getting more and more spin, while still controlling it. To maximize the spin, accelerate the racket through the ball with the arm and wrist, and just skim the ball. When you can get huge amounts of spin this way, and can control it, then try it on a table.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3302title: July 26, 2021 - Don't "Guide" Your Loopdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players, when learning to loop or when under pressure, try to guide the shot consciously. This is a mistake and leads to a weak and erratic loop. Instead, let the shot go, accelerating smoothly through the shot. Don't try to "muscle" it - that just leads to spastic shots and a loss of control. Watch how the top players do it almost effortlessly, and with enough practice, you'll be able to do it. When you miss, adjust the shot on yournextshot, and again let it go. If you still have trouble, there are two simple remedies: get a coach or copy the top players. And table tennis is a sport where you can absorb by watching - when you do so, your subconscious picks up on it, and can do a surprisingly good job of copying what it sees. One huge key - once you start looping competently, remember the feel of the shot - the entire stroke, from start through contact - and then just repeat. It's as simple as that!!!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3300title: July 19, 2021 - What Do You Do That Threatens Your Opponent?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you don't have something that threatens your opponent, then you can't threaten the opponent.  So, how do you develop something that threatens an opponent?You can't do it by just training everything equally each session. You need to spend a huge amount of time developing the things you can do that can threaten opponents. If you train everything equally, you'll tend to do everything at about the same level, and so will have nothing that threatens opponents unless they are weaker players.The first step is identifying what it is you might be able to do that will threaten an opponent. To use a common example, suppose you believe you can develop a very strong forehand. Then you need to spend a lot of time developing 1) your forehand; 2) the footwork to get into position to play the forehand; 3) serves that set up your forehand; 4) receive that sets up your forehand; and 5) rally shots that set up your forehand.Once you've identified the aspects of your game that you need to develop in order to develop something that threatens your opponents, the next step is to practice those aspects. And here you may face a problem. If you have limited practice time, you may not be able to get enough time to really develop those aspects. So what do you do? You make time - but perhaps only temporarily. (If you can't find the time to practice, then you simply won't improve.) Perhaps make a deal with yourself that you will put in extra practice time for a set period of time - perhaps six months to a year. Once you've developed those techniques, you have them for a lifetime! (Assuming you keep them tuned up.)Here's a tip on practice I've always advised to players: "Practice everything you do in a match, but focus on fixing the weaknesses and developing the overpowering strengths." A sequel to this might be that, if you can turn a weakness into a strength, your game will go up a lot.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3298title: July 12, 2021 - Playing the Non-Adjusterdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If your opponent is one who analyzes an opponent's game and adjusts to it, and is able to identify patterns and take advantage of it, you need to be unpredictable and vary your tactics. But many players, probably most, do not do this. If your opponent is not one who adjusts, then don't make the mistake of "over-thinking," where you try to mix up tactics that are lost on your opponent. Against the non-adjuster, just use the best tactic in any given situation while not overusing any one serve, shot, or technique so much that he gets too used to it. It's against the smart opponent who can adjust that you must regularly vary your tactics.Now go look in the mirror. Are you an adjuster or non-adjuster? If the latter, it's time to adjust your thinking!!!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3297title: July 5, 2021 - Changing the Pacedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:A major weakness of many players is an inability to change the pace, and thereby throw their opponent's timing off. Not doing so is a quick way of helping your opponent's timing. Many players try to change the pace, but do so unsuccessfully - either because they don't know how to do it, or because they don't really understand the purpose of changing the pace.Changing the pace doesn't mean hitting a weak shot. It means hitting the ball at a slower pace, but low to the net, with the ball landing shorter on the table. If the opponent is expecting a faster, deeper ball, he'll have trouble adjusting to this.Against aggressive players, you mostly change the pace to win the point outright via the aggressive player's misses, though be ready to jump on a weak return as well. Against control players, you mostly change the pace to force a weak shot for you to attack.Also try to find out which side the opponent is most vulnerable to changes of pace. Fast backhand players may have trouble if you suddenly give them a softer return to their backhand, but may jump on a softer ball to the forehand. Big forehand players may time faster balls but have trouble when you suddenly give them a soft one. Experiment, and find what works!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3295title: June 28, 2021 - Forehand Attackers Should Serve & Backhand Attackdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you are primarily a forehand attacker, many of your opponents will get used to your relentless forehand attacks, often from the backhand corner, especially after your serve. Why not throw them off with a backhand loop? This is especially effective against an opponent who routinely pushes your serve to your backhand corner. Surprise them - sometimes serve and get into a backhand position, and follow with a backhand loop! Too often players only backhand attack when they are caught off guard and they aren't able to use their forehand. Imagine how much more effective this is if you plan it, and have time to prepare. It means you don't have to step around (and, of course, many of us can't do that effectively anyway), you won't be out of position, and perhaps most important, your opponent has to adjust his timing to a different type of loop.The key is to be ready both to backhand loop if the ball comes to your backhand side, or to forehand loop if the opponent surprises you by going to your forehand. If they do, simply rotate your waist to your forehand side and you're all set. But once in a backhand position, you can, if necessary, cover half or more of the table with your backhand loop.You may worry that your backhand loop isn't as strong as your forehand loop, but if used as a variation, that's not only not a problem, it's a strength - the contrast will force the opponent to adjust. Not only will the backhand loop throw him off, but it'll make your no-longer-so-predictable forehand loops more effective. One of my best tournament wins ever came when, at 19-all in the third (back when games were to 21, best two out of three), after realizing the opponent had adjusted to my relentless forehand attacking, I serve and softly backhand looped twice in a row - and the opponent missed both.As an addendum, if you are the reverse - someone who serve and backhand loops against pushes to the backhand - then you should do the reverse as a variation, and sometimes serve, step around, and forehand loop, just to mess up the opponent's timing. Be unpredictable!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3290title: June 21, 2021 - Don't Play a Point Until You Have a Game Plandate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:In the movie "Searching for Bobby Fischer," there's a famous quote, "Don't move until you see it." It comes from a coach who is telling his chess-playing star not to move until he sees the line of moves he's about to play. Similarly, in table tennis (which we often call "Chess at light speed"), you shouldn't play a point until you have a game plan.If you don't know the opponent, then the game plan at the start is a mix of forcing your game on him, and figuring out his game. Sometime in that first game you should have a basic game plan worked out. The game plan should be flexible, subject to change as needed. Against an opponent who gets used to or adjusts to what you do, you have to make changes. It is likely different when you are serving than when you are receiving. And the plan changes as the rally proceeds. But at any given time, you should have a basic game plan.Here's an example of a game plan, one that I might use. On my serve, my basic game plan might be to serve a lot of short backspin, hoping to get a long push that I can loop. If my opponent pushes my serves long, and I am winning by looping those pushes, then my game plan is working. But suppose the opponent's pushes are very good and I have trouble with them, or he starts flipping or pushing my serve back short, and I'm unable to loop. Then I would have to change my game plan. For example, if he's pushing heavy or dropping my serve short, I might serve more no-spin serves, which are harder to load up with backspin or to drop short effectively. If he's flipping the serve, then I'd focus on varying the spin as well as making sure I'm serving very low. (In reality, my game plan would more likely have been to mix in short backspin and no-spin serves, so the opponent has to adjust to both - and I'd soon figure out which one is more effective against this opponent, and favor that one. Plus, I'd mix in long serves so he can't lean over the table waiting for the short serve.)On the receive, my basic game plan might be to attack deep serves, so the server would be forced to serve short. Against short serves, my game plan might be to go for a consistent flip into the backhand, trying to force a neutral backhand exchange and thereby taking away his serve advantage. But suppose I have trouble flipping his heavy backspin serves, or perhaps he has a very good backhand and so this tactic doesn't work, and if I flip to the forehand, he attacks even better. Then I might decide to instead push his short backspin serves aggressively to his backhand, and see if that works. If he's able to attack them, then I might try dropping them short and low, making it harder for him to attack. Eventually I'll work out which of these is most successful, and favor that receive, though I'd still vary it so he can't get used to any one thing.What's your game plan? Don't play a point until you have it.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3287title: June 14, 2021 - Tournament Experience vs. Practicedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players practice for many months, not playing in any tournaments until they feel they are completely ready. Then they enter a tournament . . . and flop. They don't understand it, so they go right back to practicing for many months, avoiding tournaments again. When they again feel ready, they enter a tournament again . . . and flop again. And the cycle continues. Others both practice and play regular tournaments, get lots of feedback on what works and what doesn't in tournament competition, practice it, get more feedback at tournaments, and their playing level spirals upward. They also become "tournament tough" - they get used to the pressures of playing in a tournament as opposed to practice, and they get used to playing new players and different styles. Which are you?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3284title: June 7, 2021 - What to Do in the "Big Points"date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Some players have reputation as being "winners" because they seem to be able to pull out close matches. There are two aspects to this. One is mental – nervous players don't do well in close matches. The other aspect is tactical – you need to learn what to do tactically in a "Big Point" near the end of a game.This means being aware of what has worked, and what hasn't worked, up until that point. Many players find a successful tactic, but don't think to use it when the game is on the line. Or they use a tactic that hasn't worked. You probably aren't going to keep track of exactly how many times each tactic worked or didn't work, but you have to develop a feel for it.If you have a serve, receive, or rallying shot that really gave the opponent trouble, there's often this tendency tonotuse it at a key point, since you figure the opponent is expecting it. That's over-thinking - overwhelmingly it's better at key points to go with what was working. It's just as likely your opponent is thinking you will cross him up with something different! If you don't, say, use that serve that your opponent kept missing, you may end up losing, with your opponent perhaps asking afterwards, "I'm curious why, at the end, you didn't use that serve I couldn't return?"===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3282title: May 31, 2021 - How to Play the Attacker/Blocker with Dead Rubberdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the more difficult styles to figure out is what to do against a player who attacks and blocks with a "dead" surface - either a slow inverted surface or short pips. The inverted may be slow because it's designed that way (often for beginners) or because it's old and used. Most advanced players uses livelier sponge, and that's what most players are used to playing - so when they play one of these deader surfaces, with the opponent attacking and blocking, it can be difficult to figure out. Here are three key things you should do against such players.First, get used to the dead surface as quickly as possible. Rally against it early in the match as much as you can. The worst thing you can do is lose the match because you never felt comfortable against it. And that's the key - you have a stronger weapon with your livelier surface (a gun to this sword), but he's used to playing such surfaces, and you are not used to his. So get used to it, and then you'll have him outgunned. Often this just comes down to racket angles and stroke direction, where you have to aim higher against the deader incoming surface. But the reality is that most players over do this, and so go off the end more often than into the net. Make the adjustment so you are comfortable rallying against the dead surface, and you'll be in control.Second, spin the ball. Dead surfaces can't counteract your spins as well as a livelier surface. If you put a good topspin on the ball, they are limited in how aggressive they can return it - and most likely will either block it slow (giving you time to attack that ball) or be erratic. Either way, once you are used to their surface, you are in control and you win. Heavy backspins also should give them a problem - they can't loop nearly as effectively, and if they push it back, it won't be as heavy as a push with a livelier and grippier surface. Once you are used to it, you should relentlessly attack these softer loops and weaker pushes.Third, and perhaps most important, depth is your friend. If you put the ball short, an opponent with a dead surface has three advantages. First, he can rush you, and if you are being rushed against a surface that you aren't completely used to, you already have two strikes against you. Second, he can angle you, and the extra control from a deader surface makes this easier against a short ball. Third, it's easier to attack a short ball with a deader surface than a deep one, since it's all about precision, and the shorter ball puts them closer to their target. So keep the ball deep on the table, and the opponent loses all of these advantages and instead struggles to make any effective return that you can't jump all over, once you are used to his surface.Just remember that there's a reason why few players use these dead surfaces - they are bringing a sword to a gunfight. If you are scared of the sword, then you will likely lose. But if you follow the principles above, then you'll beIndiana Jones to that swordsman.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3280title: May 24, 2021 - Inside-out Backhandsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Want to tie your opponent in knots – not to mention win a lot of points? Aim your backhand crosscourt. At the last instant, just before contact, let the racket fall behind (bringing it back with wrist and forearm), then continue your normal backhand forward stroke. Your racket will now be aimed to the opponent's forehand (against a righty) – but your opponent will likely have already reacted to a crosscourt backhand. This is especially good when blocking loops. Watch how often you ace your opponents or force them to make last second lunges! (You can also do the reverse of this, and aim your backhand down the line - and at the last second, aim it crosscourt. But that's trickier as instead of just pulling your racket back, you actually have to accelerate your forward swing to get the racket to aim crosscourt.)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3278title: May 17, 2021 - Patient Decisivenessdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Some players are too patient – they mostly just keep the ball in play, rallying while missing opportunities to score. Others are too decisive – they jump on every ball with little patience or judgment. Develop a sense of "patient decisiveness" – in other words, pick your shots carefully, but once you've made a decision, be decisive about it. Don't be afraid to take a shot, but don't be afraidnotto take a shot if it's not there. If the shot is there, take it without hesitation. If the shot isn't there, play a shot that doesn't give your opponent an easy shot while perhaps setting up your own shot. Be decisive about whatever choice you make, whether it's an all-out smash or loop kill, or a simple push or block.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3276title: May 10, 2021 - How to Play a Player Who Attacks With Long Pipsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the most difficult shots to handle is a ball attacked by a player with long pips. You have little time to react to an attacked ball, and so have to rely on your reflexes – except your reflexes usually aren't tuned to reacting to a ball attacked by long pips. But long pips isn't designed for attacking, it's designed for defense, and so its attack is limited. So the primary strength of a long pips attack is the novelty of it - you aren't used to it. (If the opponent has thick sponge under his long pips, or is using medium-long pips, he may be able to attack a little more, but his attack is still limited.) So how do you handle this? Here are four ways.Don't let them attack. Long pips can only attack effectively against backspin, or sometimes against a short and weak topspin or no-spin ball. (They can sometimes do a very "dead" counter with the long pips against a light topspin ball, but not with much pace.) So keep the ball deep, and usually either put no spin on the ball (and so get a no spin ball back) or give topspin (and so usually get a slower backspin ball return).Take a step off the table, and return with a topspin drive of some sort either offensively or defensively. By backing off the table, you have time to react. By putting topspin on the ball, the ball arcs onto the table, and stops the long-pipped player from attacking with the long pips. But be ready to get back to the table as you'll likely get a dead, backspin return.Stay at the table, open your racket, and be willing to lose a number of points as you get used to countering their attacks. Once you get used to it, you have the advantage as your typical inverted sponge (as well as short pips) is better at counter-hitting than long pips.Play against players who attack with long pips in practice as often as possible until you get used to it.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3274title: May 2, 2021 - Team Lineup Strategiesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:In a team competition, you have to set up your team lineup in advance. How do you do this? It depends on your priorities. If your priority is strictly winning, then there are guidelines on how to do this, which I'll go over below. If your priority is to let the players play roughly equally, then you place them in any order you want, perhaps setting up a rotation. Or you might focus on the most important team matches and play your best lineup in those, while playing the "weaker" players more often in less important team matches, such as against teams that are much weaker. (You can also do this against teams that are much stronger, but your stronger players might want to play in those ones. It can be a tricky balance.) Or you might have players who want to play more, and others who want to play less.The one thing Istronglyadvise is that the team decide in advance if they are playing strictly to win (i.e. best order in key team matches), playing so they play roughly equally (and so set up a rotation), or something in between. If your team is roughly equal, then perhaps drop all the calculations, set up a rotation (which you may make some adjustments as you go along), and then just let them play!Swaythling Cup FormatThere are many Teams tournaments that use the Swaythling Cup format, which is three players on each team, with all three players scheduled to play the other three in a best of nine, all singles. As soon as a team wins five, the team match normally ends, so not all nine matches are played.How would you want to set up your team in such a format? There are several factors. Here is the normal rotation for such a team match:A-XB-YC-ZB-XA-ZC-YB-ZC-XA-YAt the start, the two teams flip a coin to see who gets to choose whether they are ABC or XYZ. Should you choose ABC or XYZ? If you are the ABC team, then you generally put your strongest player in the B position/seventh match, second strongest in the C position/eighth match, and the weakest in the A position/ninth match. (More on this below.) In this case, your weakest player, in the A position, plays two of the first five matches, which lowers your chance of an easy 5-0 win. If you are the XYZ team, then your Z player (generally your strongest player) doesn't play until the third match, but then plays the fifth and seventh match - so he gets less rest than the others, and so you might wear him out. For this reason, I usually go for ABC - but I don't consider it a huge issue. Here are the matches each player would play:A: 1,5,9B: 2,4,7C: 3,6,8X: 1,4,8Y: 2,6,9Z: 3,5,7The order you set your lineup makes a difference. In the case of a tie between three or more teams, they go to the individual match record to break up the tie. (If it is still tied, then it goes to individual game record, and then point record.)Suppose you are Team Loop. Suppose you beat Team Smash, 5-4, with your strongest player winning all three, including winning the ninth match. Team Smash then beats Team Chop, 5-3. Then Team Chop beats Team Loop, 5-3. The three teams are now tied, and so we go to the individual match record. Team Loop is 8-9 (5-4, 3-5); Team Smash is 9-8 (4-5, 5-3); Team Chop is 8-8 (3-5, 5-3). Result? Team Loop comes in third.Now suppose Team Loop had instead played their strongest player in the seventh position against Team Smash and won that team match 5-2 instead of 5-4. Then Team Loop is now 8-7 (5-2, 3-5); Team Smash is 7-8 (2-5, 5-3); Team Chop is 8-8 (3-5, 5-3). Team Loop comes in first!!! Order matters.So you'd normally want to set up your lineup to allow you win by as much as possible or lose by as little as possible. (But note that under Swaythling Cup the order has no direct effect on who wins that team match; it only matters in the case of a tie.) Assuming that, this usually means playing your strongest player in the #7 position, to maximize his number of matches. You'd want your next strongest player to play in the #8 position. Then you'd play your weakest player in the #9 position, minimizing the number of matches he'd play. The ranking of your players could also change, depending on who your opponents are - there are style advantages and past records to take into account. (As well as egos, but we won't get into that!)On the other hand, whoever plays that #9 match is under a lot of pressure. So sometimes you may want to adjust the order and put your best "pressure" player in that position. Or you might have a team with an older player and two younger ones, where you might put the older player in the #9 position in most matches, so he plays less and gets more rest.Many years ago, at the U.S. Open Teams (then played in Detroit), I was in exactly this last situation. I was player/coach with two up-and-coming junior players. I told them in advance that I'd play the #9 match in every team match. We ended up in the B Division (average rating 2250) - and we won it. I went in with the highest rating on the team, but the two juniors both passed me in that tournament - but I was 5-0 playing the ninth match!!!There is another big exception to this rule. If you are pretty sure the opposing team is going to set their order in the conventional way, with their strongest player in the #7 position and so on, then you know in advance who would play who. In this case, you might set your lineup to set up the best matchups to maximize your chances of winning by as much as possible, keeping it close if you lose. For example, if one of your players has trouble against choppers and the other team has a chopper, you might set the lineup to avoid that. Or if you have a player who is great against choppers, you'd set the lineup to make sure they play. And so on. But beware - if the other team sees you doing all these calculations, they may realize what you are doing and cross you up. Or they may simply use a different order for their own reasons, and you end up with a weaker order from over-thinking.There are other exceptions. Late in a tournament you might be in a position where you know you have to win 5-0 to advance. In that case, you'd look at the order of play and make sure your two strongest players play two matches in the first five matches.Olympic Team FormatIn this three-person team format, you have the following order:B/C-Y/ZA-XC-ZA-YB-XNote the first match is doubles. (This might not be true in all tournaments.) Also note that one player plays two singles matches, while his teammates play doubles together plus one singles match each. In this format, most often you play your strongest player in the two singles matches. However, this gets tricky if the other two players aren't a good doubles team, or if the strongest singles player is even better at doubles. In this case, if you play the #1 player in singles, you get two wins but perhaps give up the doubles match, and so you have only two other matches to get the third needed win. But if your #1 player can team up with one of your other players and lock up that match and a singles match, that gives youthreeother matches to get that third win. So in this case you might play your #1 in the doubles.In this format, the order has a direct affect on who wins. The team with the better order gets the matchups they want and avoids the ones they don't want.In this format, it is generally an advantage to be the ABC team. This allows you to put your #1 player in the A position, playing two singles matches, with the second one in the fourth match. If you are the XYZ team and put your #1 player in the X position, where he plays two singles, he won't play his second singles match until the fifth match. So the ABC team has a better chance of winning 3-1 instead of 3-2, or losing 2-3 instead of 1-3. This helps if teams are tied - see example given above under Swaythling Cup.Since you want to maximize your chances of winning by as much as possible, the ABC team, assuming their #1 player is the A player (with two singles matches), would normally want to play their second strongest player in the C position (third match), with their weakest player in the B position (fifth match). The XYZ team, assuming their #1 player is the X player (with two singles matches), would normally want to play their second strongest player in the Z position (also third match).However, the biggest consideration under this format is trying to set up the matchups you want so as to actually win the team match. For example, you might be able to guess who the other team will play in the two singles matches and adjust your order accordingly. Or if both teams put their #2 player to play in the third match, and the opposing team's #2 has a style advantage or strong head-to-head record against your #2, you might want to rethink your order. In general, if you can guess the other team's lineup, you can set up your lineup accordingly. But beware - the other team may anticipate this and so cross you up! In a big match, it might be worth it for a team meeting to go over the possibilities and see if you can match up the players.Corbillon FormatThis is the simplest format. You can play with two players, where each plays the other two players, plus doubles (usually the third match), so it's best of five. You can have a third or fourth player, who only plays doubles. But the strategy here is simple: 1) play your best doubles team; 2) play your best player in the fourth position to maximize the chances he gets two matches, so you win by as much as possible or keep it closer if you lose. One key issue - you don't have to fill in your doubles team until after the first two matches are played (assuming the doubles is the third match). So unless you are playing with just two players, you should wait until those two matches are done, in case one of your doubles players gets injured playing in those singles matches. Once you fill in the doubles players, you can't change it, so why take the chance?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3272title: April 26, 2021 - Looping a Push is Not Going for a Shotdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When you push (backspin vs. backspin), you don't think of yourself as "going for a shot." It's just an easy shot that you can normally do over and Over and OVER, with few mistakes. But when you learn to loop (topspin vs. backspin, forehand or backhand), at first it's a tricky and erratic shot. Why is this? If you loop relatively slow, the shot isn't that much faster than a push. Just as with a push, you are brushing the ball to create spin. There are few reasons why it should be any less consistent than a push. And yet, players often loop with the mentality that they are "going for a shot," and so it's acceptable to miss a lot of them.Yes, there are certain aspects that make looping trickier than pushing, and I could write extensively about the differences. But that would be counter-productive - the point here is that many players, at least subconsciously, way over-estimate the difficulty of looping consistently against a push (or any other ball for that matter), and it becomes a self-fulfilling prophesy. Instead, why not tell yourself how easy it is, that it's no harder than pushing? When you drop the "going for a shot" mentality and instead think of it as just another shot you can do over and Over and OVER, your consistently will go up quite a bit. The reality is that unless you are going for a huge loop kill, or have completely misread the spin, or are out of position, looping a push should be EASY and nearly 100% consistent. Think of it that way, and while you might not get to 100% consistency, we'll settle for 90% and a huge increase in your level of play.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3270title: April 19, 2021 - Imagine a Score or Situationdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Is there a certain score or situation where you play best? Some players play better when they are behind; others play better when ahead. Some play best when they are way down, say, 4-10, and figure they have nothing to lose and so play relaxed. Others play better when up 10-4, since they are confident. Others play better under pressure, and might play better when up 10-8 or down 8-10, or maybe some other score, like 3-7. Some play better in big matches, others do better in less important ones. Which type are you? Perhaps, next time you play, imagine the score or situation is whatever makes you play your best. Perhaps imagine you are up or down 10-4, 10-8, or 7-3, or it's the men's or women's final at the Worlds, or it's just another match at the club. Imagine the psychology that allows you to play best at that score or situation. Then, after a time, you might learn to match that psychology no matter what the score or situation is.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3268title: April 12, 2021 - Learn From a Matchdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The quickest way to learn to beat a stronger player is by losing to him, but understandingwhyyou lost. This way you know what to work on so as to increase your chances of winningnexttime, or at some time in the future. It's a continuous learning process, and players who improve rapidly are constantly learning. For example, if you had trouble with a specific serve, or a spinny loop, or a heavy push, don't just complain about it - find a top player or coach who can mimic that serve or technique and practice against it and turn that weakness into a strength. If you realize there's a serve or technique you need to develop to win, then develop that serve or technique. If there are tactics that you think you need to develop to win, then try them out in matches and see what works. But it all starts with learning from your matches, and especially your losses, so you can identify what you need to work on. All these bits and pieces learned here and there add up to a savvy player.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3266title: April 5, 2021 - Reading Service Spindate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Returning serves is everyone's biggest weakness - or at least it seems that way. To learn to read spin, try focusing just on the contact period - ignore the rest of the motion before and after contact. Imagine taking a mini-video of the split second of contact. If you do this regularly, pretty soon you'll be able to isolate in your mind the actual direction of the racket at contact. From that, you can read the type of spin. (You also have to read the amount of spin, which comes from racket speed and acceleration, grazing contact, and grippiness of the surface.)However, you can also read spin by the way the ball comes off the paddle, travels through the air, and from both bounces on the table. You can't do this the first time you try it - it takes practice. Ideally, have a coach or player with good serves let you practice against their serves, where you focus on all of these aspects until you begin to be able to read the spin multiple ways. Imagine how the spin will affect the ball, and figure out what to watch for.A backspin ball goes down slightly at contact during the serve (relative to the racket), slows down when it hits the table, and floats as it moves through the air.A topspin ball goes up slightly at contact during the serve (relative to the racket), takes a low, fast hop when it hits the table, and drops as it moves through the air.A sidespin ball goes sideways in each of these steps.A no-spin ball does none of these things.The receiver also needs to read the amount of spin. Against a somewhat grippy inverted rubber, this is roughly done by a simple formula: racket speed - ball speed = ball spin. What this means is that a server's racket speed at contact will convert to ball speed and ball spin; if the racket moves fast, but the ball comes out slowly, then most of the energy has been converted to spin. (It's actually a bit more complicated than this. You get more spin if you accelerate into the ball rather than moving the racket at a constant speed, but it's close enough. Plus you have to take into consideration the grippiness of the rubber, as a non-grippy surface will have less spin.)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3263title: March 29, 2021 - Power Player Control Shotsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:There's nothing an experienced player likes better than facing a player with big shots . . . but little else. On the other hand, there are few things scarier than an opponent with big shots . . . and little else, i.e. without the "little" shots to set the big shots up and to withstand an opponent's attacks. If you are one of those players with big shots, and feel you dominate many matches - and still lose - perhaps it's time to stop thinking about these big shots and develop the "little" shots. Here are a few of these "little" shots and tactics that you might want to develop. Even if you are not a "power player," these are things you should develop to set up your own attacks, and to look for when playing a power player - if he can't do one of these things, take advantage of it.Short, low serves. It's difficult getting your shots into play if your opponent is attacking your serve. Long serves get looped, slightly high short serves get flipped or pushed aggressively.Backspin/no-spin serves. A no-spin serve is just as effective – often more effective – than a spin serve, if the opponent isn't sure it is no-spin and it's very low. Mixing up backspin serves and no-spin serves (with other serves thrown in for surprise and variation) is a great way to set up your big shots. Both tend to get pushed back deep, and the no-spin serves tend to be popped up slightly, and with less backspin.Short Receive. A short backspin serve is relatively easy to return short; if you push it long, your opponent can attack, taking away your big shots. Meet the ball right off the bounce, with a light grazing motion.Well-placed flip. You don't need to flip every serve or short push for a winner; instead, learn to flip to all three locations - wide forehand, wide backhand, and to the middle (roughly the opponent's playing elbow). Placement and consistency are key. The placement will often set up your follow-up attack.Quick, aggressive push. If not overused, it'll catch opponents off guard, and set up your big shots.Blocking. The single most effective way of beating power players is to loop first with a steady loop, forcing them into many mistakes. If the power player makes one good block against the opening loop, he'll often get a shot he can go after on the next shot. You can also counterloop these opening loops, but if you try to force the counterloop too often and too predictably, an experienced opponent will force you into mistakes by varying his loop's speed and placement.Judgement. This might be the biggest one of all. Know when to play a set-up shot and when to unleash the big shot.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3260title: March 22, 2021 - Rally Down Faster & Quicker Playersdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When faced with faster, quicker opponents, many players try to match them in speed, and end up losing because of too many unforced errors. Instead, ask yourself if it is realistic to play at the opponent's pace. You might decide you can do so for perhaps the first shot in a rally, but not afterwards. So perhaps start the rally close to the table and see if you can win the point quickly, before it gets into a fast rally.Once into the rally, you might take perhaps a half step backwards to give yourself more time. Instead of trying to bang it out at high speeds, your goal now is to out-rally the opponent, using his own pace against him. If your opponent hits the ball hard, you don't need to create your own speed - just meet the incoming ball, and let it rebound back. Move the ball around so the quicker opponent has to both move and play those quick shots. Try to keep the ball deep, which jams the opponent, takes away the extreme angles he can go for, and gives you more time to react. Since you don't need to create much speed on your own, you can shorten your stroke (so you aren't as rushed), and just keep the ball in play … and out-rally your fast but frustrated opponent.There's one other thing that helps in beating fast, quick opponents - to get out of those bang-bang rallies, perhaps develop a backhand chop. Often that quick opponent will himself be caught off guard, and will likely push - and now you can look for a ball to attack.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3258title: March 15, 2021 - Do You Really Play the Middle?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Except at the advanced levels, few players really attack the middle effectively. What is the middle? It is roughly the opponent's playing elbow, midway between forehand and backhand, where the opponent has to make a quick decision on which to use; move into position to do so; and then try to recover for the next shot, since they are now out of position, leaving one of the corners open. Almost all of your deep shots should go to the wide corners or the middle. Corners are easier to play because they are not a moving target, but the middle is often the weakest spot for an opponent. Many think they play the middle, but what they think is playing the middle often isn't.For example, their crosscourt backhand "to the middle" might cross the table in the middle, but by the time it reaches the opponent, it's moved diagonally into their backhand court. (So they need to aim the shot so it reaches the middle as itreachesthe opponent.) Or a shot that seems to go to the middle just feeds a moving opponent's forehand attack off that middle shot. (So they need to judge better when to go to the middle, and perhaps do so more aggressively, or more towards the opponent's backhand side, since he's moving to favor his forehand.) Or a player might start a rally by attacking to a corner, planning on going to the middle on the next shot – but faced with a strong return, are unable to make a strong shot to the middle. (So they need to play thefirstattack at the middle, which often sets up a follow-up attack or put-away to a corner.)So . . . are you really playing the middle? Here's a simple test - if the opponent is a bit awkward on covering your shot to his middle, then you've found the middle. If he doesn't, you haven't.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3256title: March 8, 2021 - Experiment with Serves and Receives Earlydate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Early in a match you should test your various serves against an unfamiliar player. Which serving motions work best? What proportion of the time should you serve long, short, or half-long (where second bounce is right at the end-line)? Should your deep serves be fast or slower, spinnier ones that break more? How often should you serve varying degrees of backspin, sidespin, topspin, or no-spin? Should you serve more to the backhand, middle, or forehand side? Should you serve from the wide backhand to get an angle into their backhand, from the forehand to get an angle into their forehand, or something in between? Which serves maximize your chances of following up with an attack, and which serves maximize the chances of the receiver missing outright or popping the ball up? Should you try out your trickiest serves right at the start, to see which ones work, so you can keep coming back to the ones that do, and so your opponent has to worry about that serve, making your other serves more effective?When receiving, how often should you receive aggressively as opposed to control receives? Should you attack all the long serves or should you sometimes return them more passively? Against short serves, should you push long, short, or flip, and how often for each? Where should you receive to - wide backhand, wide forehand, or perhaps attacks to the middle?Don't wait until the match is nearly over to figure these things out - that's way too late. Try to get a good idea of these things early on.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3254title: March 1, 2021 - Learn Something New Each Time You Playdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the interesting things one learns when talking to top players is that they say they are still learning. Some even make it a goal to learn something new each time they play. Do you learn something new each time you play?You can learn from your opponents; from watching or talking to others; or from your own play. Perhaps your opponent throws a serve at you that gives you trouble - you can learn both how to return that serve and perhaps learn how to do that serve yourself. Or you can learn from some technique he uses, one that you might either incorporate into your own game, or might analyze and decidenotto use - and you learn from understanding why that technique either isn’t right or isn’t right for you. Or you can learn from the tactics he uses against you, where you might learn about your own game, and then fix the weak part of your game he is playing into, and perhaps try the same type of tactics against others.When not playing is a great time to learn - just talk to the knowledgeable players at your club, and you can learn all sorts of things. (One of the best times is to talk to an opponent after you’ve lost a practice match, and get his perspective on what you need to do to improve.) Or watch others play, especially the stronger players who you strive to challenge, and see what it is they do that makes them so strong - and especially look for the root causes of what makes them good. (So it’s not just, “He has a good loop!” so much as, perhaps, “He knows how to set up his loop with his serve and receive, uses placement as much as power, and from lots of practice and good positioning, is consistent.”) Or just think about your own game, especially between matches, and you may learn a lot - from yourself!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3252title: February 22, 2021 - Rote vs. Random Drillsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:A rote drill is a drill where you do the same repetitive movement over and over. An example of this is forehand to forehand, or a side-to-side footwork drill. These are excellent for developing specific techniques you will need in a match.A random drill is a drill where there is some uncertainty about what the next shot in the drill is going to be. An example of this would be your partner putting balls to all parts of your forehand court, and you returning them all with your forehand, or randomly to the whole table, and you have to react, forehand or backhand. Another would be a serve and attack drill, where you serve backspin and your partner pushes your serve back deep to any part of the table, and you have to attack. There are countless variations, covering every aspect of the game.So which type of drills should you do? Both. However, at the beginning levels, the focus should be on rote drills to develop the foundation of your game. But as you improve, you should gradually work more and more random drills into your practice. If you don't, you'll end up becoming more or less a robotic player – one who is good against simple, predictable shots, but falls apart in actual game situations. Even at the advanced level, you should still do rote drills, both to hone your strokes and to improve your footwork, but random drills, especially ones that mimic specific game situations, should eventually take up at least half your drills.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3250title: February 15, 2021 - Pushing Short: When to Learn?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:At the higher levels, pushing short is an important to stop an opponent from looping. (A short push is a push that, given the chance, would bounce twice on an opponent's side of the table.) It is especially useful when returning short serves to stop the server's attack. (You should learn all three returns to a short serve: short push, long push, flip.) However, until a player reaches a 2000 level or so, it is often a low-percentage shot, since it is so easy to make a mistake and pop the ball up or go into the net. But here's the problem: if you wait until you are approaching a 2000 level before developing the shot, you will be years behind your competition in developing your short push. So, if you have aspirations to reach 2000 and beyond, start developing your short pushnow, even if it means losing a few practice matches. (How to push short: Take the ball quick off the bounce, and with a light touch and a grazing motion both to create backspin and so the ball doesn't bounce off the paddle fast, push it as low as possible over the net. Open the racket more against heavy backspin, close it and chop down more against light backspin or no-spin, or even light topspins.)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3248title: February 8, 2021 - Locking Up Your Opponentsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The easiest and simplest way of beating a player is to "lock him up." This basically means forcing him to do what he doesn't want to do. A classic case would be to force an opponent with a weaker backhand to go backhand to backhand with you. Another example would be take away an opponent's strong loop and force him to instead block by getting in the first loop each rally. How do you "lock someone up"? By basing your tactics toward this goal. You've got to figure out what your opponent doesn't want to do, and how you can make him do that using your own weapons - serve, receive, and strokes. Too often players think only about what they want to do, and forget about forcing their opponents to do what they don't want to do.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3246title: February 1, 2021 - Play the Middle Against Tall Players, Wide Angles Against Short Playersdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:A tall player's forehand and backhand shots are farther apart than a short player's. So he is usually weaker in the middle area, where he has to decide whether to hit a forehand or backhand. So against a tall player, play aggressively toward his elbow, which is roughly the midpoint between his forehand and backhand. When he's off the table, usually aim slightly toward the backhand; when he's close to the table, usually aim slightly toward the forehand.A short player's forehand and backhand shots are closer together, and so he may have less trouble in the middle. But he has more trouble covering the corners. So play aggressive shots to wide angles, as well as the middle. (Even against a shorter opponent, going to the middle not only causes problems for him, but forces him to go out of position, leaving at least one corner open.) Sometimes go side to side, other times to play two or more times in a row to one wide angle. Why? Your opponent has to move to cover a wide angle; after making the shot, he moves back to ready position – but if you rush him, you catch him while he's still moving back into position, in the wrong direction.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3244title: January 25, 2021 - Finding Simple Tactics That Workdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The opening lines to my book,Table Tennis Tactics for Thinkers, is, "Tactics isn't about finding complex strategies to defeat an opponent. Tactics is about sifting through all the zillions of possible tactics and finding a few simple ones that work."But how do you find these simple tactics that work? Simple - by watching the opponent before you play; asking others who have played or watched him play; and by experimenting during the match. Generally, you want to find perhaps two or three tactics that work very well, typically one on serving, one on receiving, and one in rallies. Maybe you can even handle four!I'm going to use my own game as an example of how to go about finding a few simple tactics that work. (Keep in mind that I'm talking about my game back when I was in training!)Any experienced player watching me play would note that receive was a strength, especially against short serves, where I can flip or push short well, along with occasional long pushes. But if you tried serving long too much to avoid my receive against short serves, I'd attack it pretty well. In fact, on paper, I was good against nearly all serves! However - and here's the BIG however - I was not against lots of variation. And so a good coach might tell his player, "Throw all your serves against him, even your weaker ones, keep varying them and he'll never get comfortable."On my serve, the first thing anyone would notice is that I essentially follow every serve up with a forehand attack. So why make it easy for me? Make me move by receiving at wide angles. Since I'm trying to cover the whole table with my forehand on that first shot, I often jump the gun if I think I see where the receive is going - so if you aim one way but change directions at the last second, I often get caught. If you receive to my backhand, I get to step around and forehand attack, and I'm in position to follow with a second forehand. But if you receive to my wide forehand, I get one forehand and then you can come back to my backhand. Also, I'm a rhythm player - I'm better against a good predictable receive than a weaker but less predictable one. In other words, you may make a good flip or a good push and I may still attack it with my forehand, but if you vary the two, even with lower-level flips and pushes, I lose that rhythm. And so a good coach would tell his player, "Constantly vary your receive, make sure your long receives go to wide angles, often to the forehand, and try faking one way, and going the other."In rallies, those watching would note that I'm stronger on the forehand side, but that my backhand is super consistent, and I have no trouble dealing with strong attacks on either side. If you try to overpower me backhand-to-backhand, I'm probably going to win unless you have a really nice backhand smash. However, I don't have much of a backhand attack, and don't backhand attack down the line very well. And so if you attack my wide backhand and middle, you'll get a lot of consistent but relatively soft returns that you can put away with your forehand, assuming your forehand is your better put-away shot. Or you can go to my forehand to draw me out of position (pick that shot carefully since I'm going to attack it!), then go back to my backhand and get an even weaker backhand return to attack. And so a good coach would tell his player, "Attack his middle and wide backhand, and look to end the point with your forehand. Look for chances to go to his wide forehand and then back to his backhand."So here's what the coach might say to his player before he plays me, either before the match (if he knows my game) or between games:"Throw all your serves against him, even your weaker ones, keep varying them and he'll never get comfortable. Constantly vary your receive, make sure your long receives go to wide angles, often to the forehand, and try faking one way, and going the other. In rallies, attack his middle and wide backhand, and look to end the point with your forehand. Look for chances to go to his wide forehand and then back to his backhand."I timed it, and speaking slowly, that took me 25 seconds to say. And yet, many experienced coaches might say that's too much to remember, perhaps one thing too many and too complex. It all depends on the player. So here's a simpler, slightly shorter version that probably would work better, and took me 17 seconds to say:"Throw every serve you have at him, and he'll never get comfortable. Throw every receive you have at him, but make sure to go to wide angles, often to the forehand, and maybe fake one way, go the other. In rallies, attack his middle and backhand, or go to his forehand and back to his backhand, and look for chances to end the point with your forehand."But if you ever do play me, ask me how to play me and I'll fill your head with fifty different things to do, and you'll be so confused I'll eat you alive!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3242title: January 18, 2021 - Shorten Stroke on Receivedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Returning serves is all about ball control. In a rally, the incoming shot is usually more predictable than a serve, which has a much wider range of variation – topspin, sidespin, backspin, at all speeds, amounts of spin, directions, and depths. To control your return of serve, shorten your stroke. This cuts down on power, but the shorter swing gives you more control. Unless the server messes up and pops the serve up or goes long in a way that you can easily loop, receive is all about control - placement, depth, height, spin, and variation. This doesn't mean you can't be aggressive and attack the serve, only that you should focus on consistent attacks (unless it's a weak serve). If you take away his serve advantage by getting into a neutral rally, you are on track to win.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3240title: January 11, 2021 - Should You Experiment If You Have a Big Lead?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:With games to 11, few leads are really safe. It only takes a short series of careless shots, and what seemed like a big lead becomes a big loss. However, if you do have a big lead, and the match won't be over if you win that game, consider experimenting with different tactics that you might be able to use later on. (You should generally be testing out different tactics early in a match anyway, to find out what works, unless you are already familiar with the player.) Don't do anything that's low percentage - but perhaps try out a new serve or new serve & follow, or a different receive, and see what happens. Often, you'll find something that'll be useful later on. But caution - the first priority is to win the current game, so use some judgment here! If you do find a new tactic that works, you might consider holding back on it in the next game, and do whatever you did to get your big lead in the previous game. After facing your "new" tactic in the previous game (when you had the big lead), your opponent might not be ready for the tactics you had been using, and you now have an "ace in the hole."===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3238title: January 4, 2021 - Play Both Weaker and Stronger Playersdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players who want to improve make the mistake of trying to play mostly stronger players. The result is the opponent controls play, and all the player can do is react to the stronger player's shots, or go for wild shots. A player may develop some shots this way, but it'll be hard to develop new shots or to learn how to use them in a game situation.If you are trying to improve you need to both try out new techniques that you are developing and to try out new tactics. If you do this against a stronger player, you probably won't do so well. He'll probably stop you from doing it, or doing it effectively, and so you won't be able to develop the new techniques and tactics. You won't have any way of knowing if they work, since the stronger player may win the point simply by being a stronger player against something you are just trying out and are not yet comfortable or expert at. Most likely, since these new things won't work against a stronger player, you'll stop using them and so not develop them.Instead, try out new things against players who are weaker than you. Develop them against these players, in an environment where you can control play a little more (since you are the stronger player), and where you can see if the new things might work. Don't worry about winning or losing – this is practice – as you will undoubtedly lose sometimes when trying out something new, even against a weaker player. (Imagine how bad you'd lose in this case against a stronger player!) When your new techniques begin to work against a weaker player, then it's time to try them out against your peers and stronger players.Example: suppose you want to develop your loop against backspin. The best way to do this is to serve backspin, and loop the pushed return. A stronger player may flip the serve, push short, quick push to a corner, or push extremely heavy – and you won't be able to develop the shot very well. A weaker player would be more likely to give you a ball that you can loop, which is what you need until the shot is more developed. You need to both develop the shot and your instincts on when to use it, how to follow it up, etc. When you can do it against a weaker player, then it's time to try it out against tougher competition.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3236title: December 28, 2020 - Use Quick, Deep Pushes to Set Up Your Attackdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players use pushing as a neutral "sparring" shot. Instead, use it as a weapon. You do this by pushing quick, fast, heavy, and deep, usually to the opponent's wide backhand, either deep to the corner or even outside the corner. (You should also sometimes aim to the backhand and at the last second switch and go to the forehand, and vice versa.) To push effectively (like all other shots), you have to be light on your feet so that you can move to the incoming ball so as to be in position to make an effective push quick off the bounce. (If you have to reach, you won't push well.) Many opponents will be caught off guard if done properly. If they attack, they will often make either a weak shot or miss entirely. If they don't attack, their return push will be from deep on their side of the table - so they won't be able to take the ball quick over the table to rush you, nor will they be able to go for extreme angles on their returns, so you won't be rushed in setting up your own attack. So . . . maybe it's time to get pushy?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3234title: December 21, 2020 - Proper Strokes Are 1-2-3: Don't Forget the Neutral Position!date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the most common mistakes I see when players warm up or practice is to hit each shot properly, but then backswing immediately for the next shot with no move to a neutral position. In other words, if they are hitting backhand to backhand, after each shot the player goes directly from the forward swing to the backswing for the next backhand. They are practicing something they would never do in a game, while not practicing a key thing that they would (or should!) be doing in a game. If you don't do it in practice, you won't always do it in a match, and you'll get caught off guard - and often won't realize the cause of the problem.In a game situation, you wouldn't know that the next shot is a backhand. So you'd instead move into a neutral position, ready for forehand or backhand. That roughly means your racket should be pointed at your opponent. Even in a very fast rally, you'd get into that neutral position and not start your backswing until you see where the ball is going, forehand or backhand.So, instead of practicing a 1-2 backswing/forward swing, do a 1-2-3: backswing/forward swing/neutral position.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3232title: December 14, 2020: Use It or Lose It!date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When a player finds a part of his game is not working as well as he'd like (because he hasn't been practicing it, is getting older or slower, or because it simply wasn't a strong shot to start with), the tendency is to use that technique less and less. Result? The technique gets even weaker!The classic case is an aging player who finds his footwork is not as fast as before, or his loop not as strong. He begins to play a more passive game, with less footwork and less looping, and thinks it will help his game. However, all this does is start a downward spiral. By moving and looping less, the player's footwork and loop get worse – and so the player uses them even less! And so the player's level spirals downward. (Side problem: the game becomes less physical, and so the player gets less of a physical workout, and so the game is less a health benefit.)Instead, it might be better to continuing using these techniques, at least in many practice matches, so you don't lose them. Then, in more important matches (and sometimes in practice, to develop this "alternate" game), use them less as you focus more on winning.The moral is:Use It or Lose It!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3230title: December 7, 2020 - Should You Stick With Your Best Shot If It Is Missing?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The situation: Your best shot is missing, and you are losing because of this. Should you keep using it, or abandon it? It takes years of tournament experience and hard thinking before a player can consistently make a sound judgment in a situation like this as to whether to change his strategy, or keep using the shot that is missing in order to get it going again. There are three possible reasons why you are missing your best shot: your opponent is doing something to throw you off, you are nervous or unfocused, or for some other reason you are simply off.Many players, even at the advanced levels, do not recognize when an opponent is doing something that is throwing them off. Those that don't recognize these strategies often talk and think strategy quite a bit - but only from their point of view, forgetting to take the opponent's strategy into account. Ideally, you neutralize your opponent's strategy by dominating with your own - but to do so, you need to know what the opponent is doing, or is capable of doing. So the first thing to do is figure out whether you are missing because you are really off, or because your opponent is doing something to throw you off. If the latter, then you have to find a way to counter it.Psychologically, you have to learn to be calm and focused during a match. That's mostly separate from the tactical side. If you do get nervous or lose focus, that's a good time to take a one-minute timeout, or at least take your time between points to get yourself together. Nervousness or lack of focus are the most common reason for a player's best shot to start missing.Never play a point until you are calm and focused.Finally, there are those times when, for inexplicable reasons, you are simply "off," and your best shot keeps missing. Usually it's one of the two previous reasons given, though you might not realize it. But it also might be because you are out of practice, your muscles are tight, equipment problems, problems with the playing conditions, or who knows what else.In all of these cases, this is where the judgment of years of play can pay off as you judge whether to keep using the shot in the hopes that it will come back, or switch to other shots and strategies.A good general rule is that you have to get your best shot going in any competitive match or you'll probably lose. Most often you should go down with your best shot, since you are also likely to end up winning with it. But if you see a way to win without your erratic best shot - usually by taking away your opponent's best shot, so both of you are going with your "B" games - then you might want to take it.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3228title: November 30, 2020 - Letting an Opponent Control Play is Riskydate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The next time you are in a close match, and are worried about making mistakes, and so play super safe to avoid mistakes . . . consider this. Letting your opponent control play is the biggest risk you can take in table tennis. You no longer have control over your fate. All your practice and preparation is mostly gone as you sit back and hope your opponent will hand you the victory. What can be riskier than that?This doesn't mean you go for big shots. It means, for example, pushing quick, very deep or short, and wide-angled rather than a safe push to the middle of the table. It means taking the ball a bit quicker, so your opponent doesn't have time to take control. It means going for aggressive angles and shots to the opponent's middle rather than just safe shots toward the corners. It means finding ways to return serves that take the initiative away from the server (either by taking the initiative or getting into a neutral rally), rather than just getting them back and letting the server take the initiative. It means taking the initiative at the start of a rally, whether by attacking or by doing shots that make your opponent uncomfortable, so thatyoucontrol play. There are many other examples. Take control - it's less risky!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3226title: November 23, 2020 - The Forehand Down-the Line Block and Counterloopdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When players loop to the forehand, almost invariably it is returned crosscourt, at least until you reach the higher levels. This can be effective, since it does give a wide angle to the forehand, and about 15.5 more inches going crosscourt then down the line. But it is so common that players are used to this – but they are often absolutely frozen by an unexpected down-the-line return, whether it's a block, or (at higher levels) a counter-loop.Forehand blocking down the line is not a hard shot to do, it's just one that many players do not bother learning it, partly because they warm up crosscourt so much, and because, deep down, they are trying to play it safe, and go where there's more room and where they are most used to doing it. Instead, when forehand blocking, learn to drop your wrist back so you can angle your block down the line, using your opponent's speed and spin to rebound it back (as with all blocks). When counterlooping, take the ball a little later so you can line up down the line without tilting your wrist back, or intentionally tilt the wrist back and take it inside-out (with contact on the side of the ball nearer you), and learn to go down the line. In both cases,to learn it you have to practice it. Have someone loop down the line to your forehand so you can work on your blocking, or counterloop with someone down that line. And then, in games, watch the awkward returns (or non-returns) of your opponents!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3223title: November 16, 2020 - Use Both Sides of the Body When Forehand Loopingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most players think of forehand looping as a shot done from their playing side. So a right-handed player might think of rotating his right side around as he loops his forehand. However, this will limit your power as well as throw off your balance. You should use your other side as well. This means that a right-handed player should not only rotate his right side forward and around, but he should "pull" with his left side as well, rotating it backward and around. (This is why weight training is important on both sides, not just the playing side.) If you watch the top players, you'll see that most of the stroke is in a circle.Here's a video of Ma Long forehand looping- note how he uses both sides of his body as he rotates in a circle, and his body doesn't move forward at all. This means he finishes where he starts, in a balanced position, and instantly ready for the next shot.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3221title: November 9, 2020 - Think Tactics, Then Let Godate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Between points, think about what you want to do, especially at the start of the rally – what serve to use, what type of receives. Think about what shots you want to do during a rally against any given shot as well – looping, hitting, quick blocks, etc. Keep it simple. Your subconscious mind will get the message about what to do, and it will learn to reflexively go for the shots you are thinking about. However, before the rally starts, blank out your mind, and let the shots just happen - "Let go." If you try to control your shots during a rally, you will not play well. The conscious mind isn't nearly as fast or coordinated as the subconscious mind.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3219title: November 2, 2020 - Backhand Chopping in an Emergencydate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:You are stuck out of position away from the table on your forehand side of the table. Your opponent quick hits the ball to your wide backhand, and you can't possibly get to it and make an effective backhand drive. What do you do? You could reach out and "fish" the ball back with a light topspin, but that allows your opponent to smash or loop kill. Instead, this might be the perfect time to chop the ball. Not only is it easier to do this shot from out of position than a more aggressive backhand drive, but it's a good change-up. However, many players don't use this shot because they don't think of themselves as choppers. You don't have to be a chopper to be able to throw in a good chop now and then. Just remember three principles, and your backhand chop will start to rescue you out of what was before an impossible position.First, let the ball drop to table level or below. Second, contact the ball more toward the back of the ball, not the bottom, with your racket facing more forward, not so much up, and graze the ball with a mostly downward stroke. Many players chop too much under the ball, and so pop it up. (Top choppers can do this, but that's a more advanced technique involving letting the ball drop even more, and vigorously chopping the ball with a very fine grazing motion. You can learn to do this as you get better chopping.) Third, most topspin-style players tend to chop off the end since they aren't used to the way a backspin ball floats long. So try chopping so the ball hits your side of the table – and watch it float to the other side!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3217title: October 26, 2020 - Learn To Play Close to the Tabledate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players enjoy playing from away from the table, and some (especially defensive players) base their game on this. Others step back in fast rallies to give themselves more time to react. However, for most players, you want to stay close to the table whenever possible, usually no more than an arm's length back, slightly more for loopers in some fast rallies. Otherwise, you "give up" the table. By backing off the table, your opponent has more time to react to your shots, and you have to cover more ground to cover the wide angles and in and out movements. Basically, you are at the mercy of your opponent if he knows how to take advantage of it.A looper often needs to play slightly further back then a counter-hitter, but not too far back except when forced. Often a player needs more time because his strokes aren't efficient, or perhaps too long. You might want to work with a coach on making your shots more efficient and shorter.Against a much faster player, sometimes you have little choice but to back up half or a full step to have time to rally. Sometimes, however, it's best to start the rally closer to the table, so you have a chance to put pressure on your opponent, and only back up when really forced to do so. Don't give up the table for free!If you have trouble staying at the table during a match, try this remedy. When you practice, put a barrier behind you to make sure you stay within an arm's length or slightly more of the table. You might even exaggerate it some, and really jam yourself at the table (with the barrier right behind you) so that you'll learn to do this. It will pay off in the long run.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3215title: October 19, 2020 - Sometimes Hit Twice to the Same Spotdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:In table tennis, it's good to keep moving the ball around to make an opponent move. You should play all three spots - wide forehand, wide backhand, and middle (roughly the opponent's elbow, the transition point between forehand and backhand). However, sometimes you want to go to the same place twice. Here are a few examples.You've just blocked the ball to the opponent's wide forehand. The opponent had to go out of position, but made a somewhat aggressive topspin return from his wide forehand. After the shot, he began to move back to cover his wide backhand. Most players try to take advantage of the opponent being out of position by going back to the backhand. This will often work, but it's often better to go right back to the forehand. The opponent is moving in the wrong direction, and will likely have trouble covering this shot effectively a second time in a row.Suppose your opponent has a strong forehand but weak backhand. Let's say he covers two-thirds of the table with his forehand. If you play to his wide backhand, you'll get his weak backhand. It might be tempting to then change directions and go somewhere else, and that often works - but often it's better to just pin the player down on their weak side, and not change directions until you see your opponent out of position, perhaps edging toward his backhand side to use a forehand, thereby leaving the forehand side open. If you change directions while he's in position, you are just giving him his stronger shot - and if he's smart, he'll just wait for that shot if you are going to give it to him. (You might consider going to his middle, if you think you can do it without him playing a strong forehand.)Now suppose you're playing a chopper. You've made a good attacking shot, but the chopper chopped it back. You did a drop shot, the chopper ran in and pushed it back, and then quickly stopped back for your next attack. Do you attack again? Only if the opponent is too close to the table, or if his push was weak. If the opponent is stepping back to prepare for your attack, why not do a second drop shot, and catch him going the wrong way? Most likely you won't get an ace, but you'll not only get a relatively weak return from a lunging opponent, but your opponent will probably now be jammed at the table, unable to get into position to chop your next ball. Easy point!Finally, you've smacked a strong shot right at the opponent's playing elbow – usually a player's weakest spot. The opponent manages to make a return, but not a particularly strong one. You get ready to attack his weak return. Why not go right back to his middle again? If you go to the corners, you might give the opponent and easy forehand or backhand counter. By going to the middle again, you can catch him again. Since his previous shot was weak, he's unlikely to be looking to counter-attack from the middle since he'll more likely be in a defensive position.So while it's important to move the ball around and play all three spots, it's also important to also know whennotto move the ball around.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3213title: October 12, 2020 - Don't Telegraph the Direction of Your Attackdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players telegraph the direction of their attacking shot. Often, the opponent isn't sure how he knows where you are going, he just senses it. That's because when he sees the same stroke pattern resulting in the ball going one way, and another stroke pattern going the other way, it becomes habit to react to it – even if he isn't sure specifically what in your stroke is different. (When you recognize a person's face, do you consciously see the distinct features that make this person's face unique?) So try to keep your shots identical as long as possible before committing to a direction, and even use misdirection.For example, if you set up for a forehand shot as if you were going to the right (for a right-hander), your body might face to the right. At the last second, whip the shoulders around, and go to the left. Or set up like you are hitting to the left, but at the last second, rotate the shoulders back and go to the right. Or try hitting the ball "inside-out," where you set up as if you were hitting a forehand to the left, and at last minute hit the inside of the ball (relative to you) and go to the right. Do the same type of thing on the backhand, where you might set up to go one way, and then, at the last second, rotate your shoulders so you can go the other way. If blocking, you can make these last-second changes by just rotating the racket left or right.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3211title: October 5, 2020- Exaggerate Serving Follow-Through in "Wrong" Directiondate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players can put good spin on their serves, but it is obvious what type of spin is on the serve from your racket direction. There are many ways of hiding the spin, but here's a simple one: the instant after contact, change the direction of the racket, and exaggerate the follow-through – but in the "wrong" direction. So if you are serving topspin, you might use an exaggerated downward follow-through to make it look like you served backspin. You might also try following through to the side to disguise backspin or topspin. One classic, and perhaps the most common, is to serve no-spin (by contacting the ball near the handle, which doesn't move much), but exaggerate the downward motion (especially with the racket tip) to make it look like backspin (so they will often return it high, giving you an easy put-away).  Remember – the hand is quicker than the eye, and serving is the "trick" part of table tennis.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3209title: September 28, 2020 - Use Quickness, Ball Placement, and Variation Against Short Servesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:You should have different strategies for returning deep serves and short serves. (Short serves are serves that, if given the chance, would bounce twice on the receiver's side of the table). Against short serves, you can't really loop, since the table is in the way. (You can do a backhand "banana flip," where you create a lot of topspin, though not as much as a regular loop.) So it is difficult to be too aggressive against a low, short serve. The keys against short serves are quickness, ball placement, and variation. Since your opponent has little time to react to your shot (your contact point is closer to him than against a deep serve), he is vulnerable to quick shots, wide angles, and variation (so he can't anticipate). Mix up your placement, going wide to both angles and (when returning aggressively) at the opponent's elbow (the crossover point between forehand and backhand). Mix up your shots, giving the opponent a variety of long, quick pushes, heavy pushes, short pushes, and flips at varying speeds. (Against backspin or no-spin serves, use the whole variety; against sidespin or topspin, mostly flip, but occasionally push by chopping down on the ball so that it doesn't pop up.) Whatever you do - keep opponents guessing!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3207title: September 21, 2020 - Against a Fast Attacker, Make At Least Two Strong Shotsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:It can be difficult playing someone with a fast attack or quick blocks, who rushes you and takes over the attack with his or her counter-attack. How do you beat someone like this? There are many ways, depending on your style. If you are an attacker, you may run into a problem that when you attack, you get quick-blocked out of position, and quickly lose the point. Instead of trying to make shot after shot against such an opponent, focus on making two strong shots. That means your first shot is designed to set up the second shot. That means placement and depth. It also might mean slowing down your first shot to give yourself time to prepare for the second shot. Often there's nothing more effective against a fast, quick player than a slow, spinny loop, deep on the table, often throwing off their timing or jamming them on the backhand. It's hard to block aggressively and can set up your second shot. The second shot should be aggressive, but placement is key - go wide to the corners or at the opponent's middle (roughly the playing elbow).===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3205title: September 14, 2020 - A Trick to Beat a Tricky Pusherdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Some players have very accurate pushes, and will push very wide to your backhand over and over - unless they see you stepping around, or even hedging that way. That's when they push to your wide forehand and catch you off guard. Let's say your forehand loop is stronger than your backhand loop, but your pushing opponent isn't giving you the chance to use it. Here's a simple trick: Serve backspin or push to the pusher's backhand. Then take a step to your left with your left leg (for right-handers). As the pusher is about to push, step back into position. You'll be amazed at how many pushes you'll get right into your forehand, where you are now ready and waiting! The pusher saw your fake "step around," and changed directions – but you were one step ahead of him! (I call this the "Hokey Pokey" tactic: "You put your left foot out, you put your left foot in, you put your right foot out and you loop a forehand in, you do the Hokey-Pokey as you celebrate your win, that's what it's all about!" Lefties reverse, and if you haven't heard of the Hokey-Pokey, Youtube is your friend. I first devised this tactic many decades ago as an up-and-coming player when trying to figure out how to beat USATT Hall of Famer and master pusher Jim McQueen.)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3203title: September 7, 2020 - Tactics Early In a Match: Explorers and Dominatorsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:There are basically two ways to play tactically early in a match. You can either feel your opponent out to see what he can do and then adjust your tactics based on this ("The Explorer"); or you can force your game on the opponent right from the start, making tactical adjustments as you go on ("The Dominator").The Explorer uses a variety of tactics early on as he tests his opponent. He uses all his shots - pushes, blocks, loops hard and soft, counterdrives, etc. – and puts the ball all over the table at various speeds. He uses all of his serves and receives as he judges the best tactics to use in the match. Some players in this category fall into the trap of over-adjusting to an opponent, and let the opponent dictate play. Being an Explorer doesn't mean you simply adjust to the opponent's shots; it means you are willing to risk falling behind early on as you feel out his game and search for the best tactics. (Often, however, the Explorer doesn't fall behind as his opponent struggles early on to adjust to the myriad of shots thrown at him.) Ideally, the explorer will find a way to use his strengths against the opponent's weaknesses.The Dominator comes in with his best shots right from the start, trying to force the opponent to adjust to his shots. This is what most high-level attacking players do, though they generally are a little of both categories. The problem with this method is sometimes you miss out in discovering a major weakness in the opponent's game. Also, some players in this category fall into the trap of not adjusting when their opponent adjusts his tactics, and often lose due to this lack of flexibility. Being a Dominator does not mean you simply throw your best shots at the opponent and hope for the best; it means you start off with your best game, and then make tactical adjustments.Are you an Explorer or a Dominator? Whichever you are, perhaps you should experiment with a little of the other. To be at your best, you need some of both.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3201title: August 31, 2020 - Move Like a Prodate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most players go through the following sequence during each shot of a rally:Opponent is about to strike ball.Opponent strikes ball.Player sees incoming ball.Player decides if he has to move.Player moves.He's slow to get to the ball and complains he's too slow.Top players go through the following routine:As opponent is about to strike ball, player flexes knees and prepares to move.Player sees direction of opponent's swing and sees where it's going before contact.Player begins to move into position.Opponent strikes ball.Player finishes moving into position.Player is in position, with lots of time to spare.As you can see, the second sequence is much quicker. The three key points to remember are these:Before your opponent hits the ball, flex your knees. This prepares you to move quickly.Watch the direction of opponent's swing and learn to move as soon as he's committed to a direction, before contact.Assume you always have to move.If you follow these three tips and the "top players routine," you'll be in position far more quickly than before. Foot speed helps, but the real secret is technique.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3198title: August 24, 2020 - On Short Serves to the Forehand, Challenge the Forehand, Often Go to the Backhanddate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Assuming two right-handers play, a common rally might start with a short serve to the forehand. Many receivers don't understand the tacatics in receiving this shot. The two main things to think about are this: First, if the receiver goes crosscourt, he has the long diagonal to go after (10.3 feet, instead of 9 feet down the line, about 16 more inches), as well as a wide angle. Therefore, if heattacksthe serve (by flipping), he should often go crosscourt, as wide as possible. (Another option is to attack the middle, the midpoint between forehand and backhand.) Second, because of the threat of this crosscourt wide-angle attack, the server has to guard the wide forehand angle. So, the receiver should often fake this shot, and at the last second go down the line, to the often weaker, and now likely unprepared backhand. You can also fake the crosscourt and simply push down the line - see what works! When a righty plays a lefty (or the reverse), you can do a similar tactic where you fake down the line, and then go crosscourt to the backhand.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3196title: August 17, 2020 - Should You Develop Your Forehand Push?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:At the lower levels, pushing is often over-used; at the higher levels, spectators often underestimate its value. All top players have excellent pushes. However, advanced players – and even intermediate players – rarely push against deep backspin to the forehand, unless they are very defensive choppers. It's simply better for them to attack, usually with a loop. (The same can be said on the backhand, if you have a good backhand loop.) So … should you develop your forehand push?The answer is yes – but not necessarily against long backspin to the forehand. You need to develop your forehand push mostly against short backspin to the forehand. Against this ball, you can attack, but pushing is often the better bet. You can push short, push quick and long, go for angles, heavy spin, etc. – all sorts of variations. And because you are closer to your opponent, he has less time to react. (At the same time, don't predictably push - learn to flip short balls as well.)The problem is how do you practice your forehand push? If you push forehand to forehand with a partner, then unless both of you are practicing short pushes, you'll be practicing pushing against long balls. The answer is to develop the forehand push this way with a partner, but once it becomes relatively advanced, start focusing on drills where you start the drill by pushing against a short backspin, and then continue the drill/rally with other shots. You won't get as much repetitive practice this way, but you'll practice what you need to develop. For example, your partner serves short to your forehand; you push quick off the bounce to your partner's backhand; he pushes quick to your backhand; and you loop, either forehand or backhand. (Or, alternately, your partner loops off your forehand push, if it's "his" drill – and you still get practice pushing.)Meanwhile, a nice drill is to push forehand to forehand (or backhand to backhand) where both players push short – but the first time a player pushes long (by mistake), you loop. This develops your short push, develops your loop, and best of all, develops your judgment on whether a ball is long or short.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3194title: August 10, 2020 - Two Tips to Increase Forehand Looping Powerdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you have trouble generating power when forehand looping, try out these two tips, and you'll be surprised at the improvement. First, keep your legs farther apart. This gives more stability and more torque into the shot. Second, contact the ball more from your side. This forces you to use your whole body instead of mostly your arm. By following these two tips, you'll automatically put more body weight into the shot, increasing your power. If your basic technique is roughly correct but you don't have good power, these two steps will be a huge help.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3192title: August 3, 2020 - How to Vary Your Receive Against Short Backspin Servesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most players return short backhand serves with a simple push, without much thought to it. This makes the player predictable and vulnerable to third-ball attacks. The key is to vary the return. Let's take a look at just how many effective returns you can actually do against a short backspin serve – and ask yourself how many of them you actually do! Below are the most common effective returns – but there are others. Use your imagination! (And then apply the same thinking to other types of receive. In general, against short serves, focus on consistency, control, placement, and variation; against long serves, play more aggressively.)Topspin flip to wide forehandTopspin flip to wide backhandTopspin flip to middleFlatter flip to wide forehandFlatter flip to wide backhandFlatter flip to middleQuick push to wide forehandQuick push to wide backhandQuick push to middle (to rush a two-winged looper)Heavy underspin push to wide forehandHeavy underspin push to wide backhandShort push to wide forehandShort push to wide backhandShort push to middleSidespin push to wide forehand (breaking away from opponent)Sidespin push to wide backhand (breaking away from opponent)Any of the above where you fake one shot or direction, and do another===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3190title: July 27, 2020 - When Playing an Unfamiliar Player, Focus on Serve & Receivedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When you face a new and unknown opponent, you aren't sure yet how the rallies are going to go. But you can control how the rallies start. Learn to use serve & receive force rallies to go the wayyouwant them to go, and so make your opponent adjust to you. It doesn't matter if the opponent plays very orthodox or has an unusual or weird style, you can often force them into the type of rally you want. A few examples:A backspin serve often forces a backspin return.A topspin serve often forces a topspin return.Fast & deep serves often get you into a fast exchange, and can back players slightly off the table. Forehand loopers are often forced out of position by fast, deep serves.A fast but dead (spinless) serve not only forces many mistakes, but is often returned softly.Short & low serves often set you up for a first attack, often a loop. Short backspin serves are usually pushed, while short sidespin serves are either pushed back (usually high) or attacked relatively weakly (assuming the serve was low).Slow but deep sidespin serves, against an opponent who doesn't loop, sets you up for all sorts of attacks.A short and low no-spin serve is hard to either attack or push heavy and usually gives you a ball you can attack.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3188title: July 20, 2020 - The Importance of Lobbingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the strange things top players and coaches often notice is that beginning/intermediate players who "goof off and lob" during practice often improve rapidly. There is a reason for this.When a beginning/intermediate player backs up and lobs, he develops mobility and footwork, and learns to react to hard-hit shots. Later, as he becomes more advanced, his off-the-table play, especially covering ground for counter-looping, or simply reacting to hard-hit shots, is much better than it would have been otherwise, and plus the habit of moving is more developed. This gives him an advantage, as long as he doesn't overdo it and make a habit of backing off the table too easily. Another advantage is that by lobbing, you better understand a lobber's strengths and weaknesses, and so better know what to do when you play a good lobber.There are two classic cases of this. Sweden's Jan-Ove Waldner and Mikael Appelgren were sometimes called "uncoachable" as juniors due to their tendency to "goof off and lob" during practice. Both went on to be ranked #1 in the world, with two-time World Men's Singles Champion and Men's Singles Olympic Gold Medalist Waldner often called the greatest player in history. These days players tend to play a bit closer to the table than in the past, but the principle still holds, as long as it isn't overdone.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3186title: July 13, 2020 - Fast, Quick Motions Disguise a No-Spin Servedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players learn to put decent spin on their serves. However, they often find it difficult to disguise that spin. Why not develop a no-spin serve, with a fast, violent serve motion? Change directions as the racket contacts the ball (contacting the ball as the racket is changing directions at the split second where it is nearly motionless), or contact the ball near the handle of the blade (where the racket is moving slowest) so there will be little spin . . . and your opponent will be left making a snap decision on what spin is on the ball. Very often they will react to it as if it has spin. For example, if they think it has backspin (but doesn't), they might open their racket to push, and pop it up. Or if they attack it, they'll lift it off the end. A no-spin serve is just as effective as a spin serve if the opponent thinks there is spin on the serve!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3184title: July 6, 2020 - Side-to-Side Training for Improvement and Healthdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Table tennis is a game of movement, and most of that movement is side-to-side. To master the sport, you must be a master at patrolling the five-foot width of the table. Which is why players who wish to improve do lots and lots of side-to-side footwork drills. (There are also in-out drills, but that's a separate issue.)But you don't need a table to do this - you can do it at home! Just find a place where you have room, and measure off five feet. Then, either with or without a racket (but preferably with!), just practice your side-to-side movement, just like it was a game! Make sure to cover both corners, stroking forehands and backhands alternately over each. Then perhaps do the same, doing just forehands, and covering half to two-thirds of the table as you go side-to-side. Then do it again with your backhand, perhaps covering half the table. And then, when you're ready to go big-time, do the three-shot 2-1 drill sequence: a backhand from the backhand side; a forehand from the backhand side; a forehand from the forehand side; and repeat. (And then perhaps add an in-out drill - perhaps reach in for a short forehand ball, then step out for a deep backhand, and repeat.)Do this, and you not only will improve your table tennis - dramatically! - but you'll also get great exercise. Who needs to go out and run ten minutes when you can do it inside? (If you want to count, it's 1056 five-foot moves to a mile!)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3182title: June 29, 2020 - Training Down the Linedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the lessons I learned from legends like Dan Seemiller and Dave Sakai was the value of down-the-line training. When you hit crosscourt, you have about ten feet and 3.5 inches. Down the line, it's only nine feet, so 15.5 inches shorter. If you can maintain an aggressive down-the-line attack in a drill, then going crosscourt is easy!Often the simplest drill is the best. Just have one player hit or loop forehands down the line to the other player's backhand. (If you have a righty and a lefty, then it's forehand to forehand and backhand to backhand.) Drive the ball aggressively deep and as close to the side-line as you can. Often the forehand player is the aggressor, the backhand player blocking, but the backhand player should also learn to be aggressive with these down-the-line shots.When hitting or looping backhands down the line, face the direction you are going. You can make last-second adjustments in a game sometimes to throw an opponent off, but by the time you start the forward swing, you need to be lined up for the shot, especially the shoulders. The exception to this is when just blocking against an opponent's aggressive shots, where you can just angle the racket side to side to change directions.When hitting or looping forehands, you also want to line the shot up. This usually means more shoulder rotation and taking the ball a little later than usual.There are countless drills where you can incorporate down-the-line shots, but start with the simplest, simple down the line. Then you can progress to other drills. Perhaps have one player hit side to side while the other alternates forehands and backhands, with one of them crosscourt, the other down-the-line.After doing lots of down-the-line training, two things will happen. You will be able to do it in a match, and you will find crosscourt surprisingly easy, with that extra 15.5 inches!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3180title: June 22, 2020 - Do You Really Have Control of Your Shots?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most players below the higher levels do not really control their shots, both in terms of direction and depth. One reason for this is they don't really get much feedback on it, and so don't realize just how little they are really controlling the ball. Another is that they aren't really aiming the ball at specific spots, instead just aiming at a general area. And another is they don't really practice this type of control.Like most techniques, it's best to practice the simplest aspects and work your way to game-type shots. So the best way to start is to put a target on the far side of the table - perhaps a bottle - and get a box of balls and commence target practice. Start by either bouncing the ball on the table or tossing the ball in the air and either hit or loop the ball at the target. If you can't hit the target this way, how can you do it in a game, where you have unpredictable incoming balls at varying placements, speeds, heights, depths, and spins? When you are somewhat proficient at hitting the target, you are developing directional control.Next comes depth control. Fold up a towel so it's no more than 12 inches wide (smaller if possible), and put it near the far end of the table, near a corner. (A towel makes it easy to tell if you've hit it, but you can also use a piece of paper.) Now try hitting that. When you are somewhat proficient at hitting the target, you are developing depth control.Now it's time to do it in a real rally. Place a sheet of paper near the far side of the table, near a corner, and rally with someone. See how often you can hit the paper. When you are somewhat proficient at hitting the target, you are developing directional and depth control in a rally. Not only that, but at this point you are more aware than before of actually aiming for targets and hitting them!How does this help you in a match? Directionally, you want to hit nearly every shot either very wide or at the opponent's middle (roughly their playing elbow, midway between their forehand and backhand). Now you can do that! You also want to mostly keep the ball deep on the table. Now you can do that! Most players do not realize how many points are won and lost not because the opponent makes a good shot, but because you give him theopportunityof making a good shot by not placing your shot, both directionally and depth-wise. Why make things easy for him?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3178title: June 15, 2020 - Practice Partner Collaboration - the PPC of TTdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:All sports involve collaboration, and table tennis is no exception. In fact, due to its one-on-one nature, table tennis in particular fits into this mode. One obvious collaboration is between coach and student, but there's an equally important one - between playing partners.If you want to improve, players need to work together, both at the table and off. At the table, players can both play matches to improve their games, as well as drilling together in ways that both improve, often with players taking turns doing drills that the other needs, though both should be improving from the drill. But often the key difference between those who improve some and those who improve greatly is how far that collaborative process goes - does it end at the table ("some") or does it continue away from the table ("greatly")?Away from the table, successful playing partners discuss and critique their games. If you played a practice match and found that your partner's receive was somewhat predictable, or that he had trouble covering, say, the middle or wide forehand, or that his backhand attack was erratic, or anything else - tell him! If you think his opening loops were too soft or landed short, or that his serves too often went long (or too predictably short), or that he telegraphed certain shots - tell him! This is not criticism, it's critiquing: "to evaluate in a detailed and analytical way."And since this works both ways, you will profit from your playing partner's critique of your game. If he points out a problem with your game, listen to him - as your playing partner, he gets to play you regularly, while you don't get to play yourself. He has a unique perspective.Critiquing is not all negative. One of you might see in the other something that has great potential, and so suggest developing it. For example, your partner might say, "You have such a strong attack - you should play more aggressively when you are serving." Or you might tell your partner, "You have such a strong backhand, you shouldn't try to force the forehand so much." And so on.Of course, you could take the short-term selfish route andnotmake such helpful suggestions to your playing partner, in the hopes that you can continue to beat him - which means you will have a weaker playing partner, as opposed to an improving one, where you can improve together. Plus, if you aren't helping him in this way, why should he help you?Take the long-term route, and make a habit of discussing each other's games with your playing partners. Turn it into a long-term partnership where both benefit and both improve. The icing on the cake is that by regularly analyzing each other's games, you become better at doing that, which improves your tactical skills in other matches, thereby raising your level of play even more.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3176title: June 8, 2020 - How to Never Miss an Easy Smashdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Few things are more frustrating than missing an easy smash that costs you a game or match. Especially under pressure, it's easy to miss them. But if you follow three rules, you will never miss another one. Really! The three rules for never missing a smash are simple.Until the point is absolutely and completely over:Expect every ball to come back. So often a player thinks the point is over only to have an opponent get one more ball back. It's an easy smash, but because you thought the point was over, you aren't ready, and so you miss it. Perhaps even more often, when faced with an easy smash, a player realizes the point is about to be over, and subconsciously lets up - and so misses.Stay down. When faced with an easy smash, where you think the point is about to be over, many players subconsciously stand up a little straighter. (This is closely related to #1 above.) Even if it's only an inch, this completely throws off your stroke. It also raises your racket, which changes the trajectory of the racket towards the ball, which throws off your timing. Since you can often still make most smashes despite this slight straightening, players often don't get the feedback from missing from this enough, and so they continue to do this, and continue to wonder why they miss - especially under pressure - more than they should.Strive for perfect execution. If the focus is on winning the point, then it's easy to get nervous about missing. Instead, focus on perfect execution. Perfect execution leads to winning the point, so you don't need to worry or even think about the latter. And since you have more margin for error on most smashes (since it's normally against a higher ball), all you really have to do is get near-perfect execution, so there's no pressure on getting it perfect. Note that "Strive for perfect execution" implies that you must alsopracticesmashing easy balls with perfect execution, since how else can you do so? (Some players loop-kill instead of smashing, even against relatively high balls - if so, then it's the same thing, you must practice it.)Did you notice that "Stay focused" is not one of the three? That's because if you follow these three, staying focused is the natural result. If you expect the ball to come back, stay in a natural ready position (which cues the mind that the point isn't over), and strive for perfect execution (which implies focus), how can you not be focused?Did you notice that none of the rules are about thingsNOTto do, but about thingsTO DO? It's much easier to execute something you need to do than to execute something you aren't supposed to do.And finally, did you notice that part in #3 about practicing the smash? This is true of every aspect of the game, including seemingly easy shots like smashing a high ball. (And if smashing a high ball isn't easy, then you definitely know what to practice.)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3174title: June 1, 2020 - Do You Have a Quadruple Threat Receive?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players get used to receiving any given serve the same way, because it's safer that way. This is especially true against short serves, where many players predictably push everything back long. Others reach in and predictably flip over and over. But this makes things easier for the server, since he knows what you are going to do. Some receivers may vary the receive in simple ways, such as the placement of their long push, but this still leaves them rather predictable.The exception is against deep serves, which you should attack in some way, unless you are facing a server who can't effectively attack a passive return. But even then you might want to mostly attack, since presumably your goal is to learn to beat stronger players. Learn to attack deep serves with both forehand and backhand, and to vary the speed, spin, depth (though mostly deep), and placement of your attacks.It is against shorter serves that you should focus on variation. If it's short topspin (which most players can't do), then you should mostly attack it. But against most short serves, you should vary pushing long, pushing short, and flipping. By having this complete arsenal, you can both use what is most effective against that server, and vary your returns, so he doesn't know in advance what to prepare for.  Even if you are very good at one type of receive, that receive will be even better if you vary it so your opponent can't anticipate that receive.Perhaps find a good ratio of how often to do each receive. For example, some top players use the 2-2-1 rule - out of five receives against a short serve, they flip two, push two short, and push one long. Others use the 3-2-1 rule - three flips, two short pushes, one long push. (Not that this ratio "rule" really should vary, depending on the server and his strengths and weaknesses, so you favor the receives that give him the most trouble while still varying them.) At lower levels, perhaps do more long pushes, but don't completely rely on them.So what is that quadruple threat receive? Attack the deep serve while using all three receives against shorter serves - push long, push short, and flip.How to develop these receives? Get a practice partner or coach and take turns practicing serves and receives. Ideally, get a box of balls and don't even play out the point - the server serves and grabs the next ball as the receiver receives. After doing this for a time, then perhaps play out one shot, where the server serves and attacks, and then grabs the next ball as the receiver just receives and returns the first attack. After doing that for a time, then you can move to full game-play and play out the points.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3171title: May 25, 2020 - Three Types of Anticipationdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:There are three main types of anticipation in table tennis. You develop all three by practice and observation. Often the key to all of these is to learn when your opponent has committed to what he's doing, especially his direction, so you can anticipate and react to his shot earlier than if you waited until the ball came off his racket. You also don't want to move too soon, allowing him to change direction. This is why it's good to observe players in advance, and to test them out early in your match. Often players never get past the stage of reacting to the ball coming off their opponent's racket, and so they lose precious time in reacting to their shots. Here are the three types of anticipation:Remembering what your opponent has done in the past. Examples: If he has a big forehand but almost always goes crosscourt, you can anticipate it. If his first attack is almost always at your middle, as some do, you can anticipate it. If you are lobbing and your opponent almost always smashes to your wide backhand to keep you from forehand counter-attacking, you can anticipate it and step over as he smashes, and forehand counter-attack. If he flips all of your short serves, or pushes them all long to your backhand, or something else, you can anticipate it. If he always pushes to your wide backhand, you can anticipate it.Recognizing the situation the opponent is in. For example, if you do a big breaking serve deep to the backhand, so the ball curves away from the receiver, it's difficult for him to take it down the line. So you can anticipate that it'll come back crosscourt. Or suppose you are lobbing and do a very deep, spinny lob to his wide backhand. Most players will have trouble smashing this down the line, so you can anticipate he's going more toward your backhand.By watching the opponent's backswing and forward swing, you can learn at what point in his swing he's committed to a direction. From that, you can anticipate where he's going before he actually contacts the ball. For example, if the opponent rotates his shoulders way around on his forehand backswing, he's probably going down-the-line, while if he minimizes this rotation, he's probably going crosscourt. On most shots, the opponent's racket aims where he's going by the time he starts his forward swing, and so you can anticipate from that. (At higher levels, players can use these things to throw opponents off, so how and when you can anticipate varies from opponent to opponent.) This is probably the most important anticipation of all, and perhaps the hardest to develop. It takes years of actively observing players so you can develop an instinct for when they really are committed.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3169title: May 18, 2020 - Mind Games: The Good, The Bad, and The Uglydate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:There are mind games in all sports. Some are okay; others are not. The key difference is whether the mind game involves some sort of table tennis skill or tactic, as opposed to just finding ways to bother or even cheat the opponent.If an opponent plays mind games and it's bad or ugly, call for an umpire or referee. But whatever you do, don't let your opponent's actions bother you - in fact, use his actions forextraincentive. I learned to do that long ago, and so when opponents play mind games with me, all it does is get me into the ultimate focus - in the zone. The same is true of most champions in any sport. You should do the same.As to those mind games, here's a rundown of things to watch out for! And to those of you who do play bad or ugly mind games - word gets around, and once you get that reputation, youneverlose it. Just don't.The Good: Supposed your opponent has one serve that gives you serious problems. You could play defensive and try to just get it back. But suppose you instead attack it. There's a decent chance you might make the shot, in which case your opponent might hesitate to use that serve again. But even if you miss it, the server will likely be leery of using that serve again, since you had no hesitation in attacking it. And so, even by missing, you may scare him from using the serve. It's a mind game - and a good one!Another example - I once played someone who had a great backhand but a weak forehand. So what did I do? I served deep to his foreevery single time. Tactically, perhaps I should have varied it some so he wouldn't get used to it. But instead, he got so irritated at me for doing this that he fell apart, and so was unable to adjust. I won easily - and he wouldn't shake my hand after the match, saying I had tried to show him up. Nope, all I did was stick to a successful tactic, and if he hadn't fallen apart mentally, he might have adjusted, and forced me to vary my tactics more. Since I saw him mentally falling apart, I stuck with the tactic - another successful mind game - and another good one!The best mind game I ever did was against a player who was equally good as an attacker and as a chopper. As an attacker, he was a threat to me, but as a chopper, he had no chance - I ate choppers for breakfast back in those days. So what did I do? When he chopped, I intentionally struggled! I would grunt as I "strained" to lift his chops, I'd impatiently slap shots off the end and act frustrated, and so on. It worked - he stuck with his chopping, never realizing I was carrying him, intentionally keeping it close until the end of each game.The Bad: Showing up late on purpose, talking to your opponent, stalling, and so on. There are players who intentionally show up for matches late, forcing you to wait around, in the hopes that you'll get irritated and won't play well. Or they'll talk to you between points, hoping to distract you. The ultimate example of this is the player who constantly praises your good shots - he's trying to get you out of the zone by getting you to think about your shots. These are mind games, and bad ones in my opinion - but some would say they are just a part of the game. When someone does them to me, I call for an umpire.Some mind games are borderline good and bad. I know of one top player who, during his peak years, when it got close, when he was serving he would first just stand there, staring at his opponent. It was unnerving and a type of stalling. Another mind game can be screaming every point. Yelling when you win a point is accepted in most sports, including table tennis but some overdo it intentionally, as a way to unnerve an opponent.Perhaps the ultimate "bad" mind game ever was in the final of Men's Singles at the 1987 World Championships. (Matches were best of five to 21 back then.) China'sJiang Jialiang(the defending Men's World Champion) was up 2-1 in games toJan-Ove Waldnerof Sweden, but down 16-20 game point. He scored four in a row to deuce it. Then, in a highly controversial move, he walked around the table, cutting right in front of Waldner, while pumping his fist up and down! Jiang went on to win the game and match, 24-22, for his second straight title.Here's video of the match, starting with Jiang serving at 19-20. People still argue over the sportsmanship of this move.The Ugly: I've played and coached matches where an opponent couldn't handle a specific serve, and so whenever he saw it coming, he'd suddenly stand up straight and catch the serve, saying he wasn't ready. Or he might complain about the legality of an obviously legal serve, just to keep you from using it. A horrible example of this is one strong player I know who, if he's losing, will suddenly catch your high-toss serve - which the server tossedover his head- and claim the toss was less than six inches! This will often irritate the server, which is exactly what he's trying to do. When someone does these things, call for an umpire, a referee, or both.Another ugly mind game is intentionally calling the score out wrong. Suppose it's 9-all in the fifth, and your opponent, who is serving, calls out, "10-9." You immediately correct him, there's an argument, and it goes one of two ways. If he's really a cheater, he'll stick to his guns, and you'll have to call the referee - and things can get nasty. But just as often the opponent will condescendingly agree to play it at 9-all, even though he knows he's up 10-9, which of course irritates you - and that's exactly what he's trying to do, right at 9-all in the fifth!The single worst example of ugly gamesmanship that I've seen took place many years ago at the Southern Open. I was coaching a high-ranked 13-year-old against a much higher-rated player. (It was best of five to 21.) The 13-year-old won the first two games. The opponent, a big, muscular six-footer, won the first point of the third game. He then walked over to the kid I was coaching (who was barely five feet tall and skinny), put his fist right in his face, and screamed, "Yeah!" I called the referee and demanded a default, but he wouldn't do it - and my kid was literally done, couldn't play after that, and lost three straight.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3165title: May 11, 2020 - Five Ways to Take Away an Opponent's Big Shotdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Attack first. Most attackers want to attack first.Push well. This means low, deep, heavy or varied, quick off the bounce, and to wide angles, with last-second changes of direction.Go to his strong side first, when you get to choose the shot. If his strong side is the forehand, then go there, and then come back to the backhand, forcing the forehand attacker to move and play backhand.Serve short to his strong side, bringing him over the table, then go deep and wide to the other side.Fast, breaking serves to the weak side. If he has a big forehand, serve deep and very wide to the backhand so the ball breaks away even wider - making it very difficult for him to play forehand. (If he does, develop a fast down-the-line serve with the same motion, and ace him when he moves too soon.) If he's stronger on the backhand, set up on your forehand side and do a deep sidespin serve to his wide forehand (such as a tomahawk serve), so it breaks even wider.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3163title: May 4, 2020 - Don't Practice Hesitationdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:To improve, it's important to do footwork drills. Some are simple, such as side-to-side forehand-forehand drills. Others are more complicated. For example, you might do a drill that starts with your partner pushing to your backhand, you backhand (or forehand) loop to his backhand, and then he blocks to your forehand.Advanced players understand that in these rote drills, they are practicing only the footwork and the stroke. But many beginning and intermediate players don't get that, and try to play it like it was a match. After that first opening shot, theyknowthe next ball is going to the wide forehand - but because they would not know this in a match, they wait until the opponent does the shot, andthenmove. That would be fine in a random drill, where you don't know where your partner is hitting the ball, but not in the rote drill described here. And so what happens is you end upknowingwhere the next balls going - to the forehand - but do not immediately move there. Result? You are practicing hesitation!So remember that if you are doing a rote drill, don't hesitate to moveimmediatelyto where the next ball is going - you are practicing footwork and strokes, and don't want to make hesitating a habit. When you want to practice reacting to where your partner is hitting to, do a random drill for that, where youdon'tknow where he's going, and so have totrulyreact.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3161title: April 27, 2020 - Don’t Warm Up Your Opponent During a Matchdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:A common mistake I've seen is for a player to find something that seems to work in a match, and then go to the well too often - they use that tactic so often that the opponent gets used to it. This is a double-whammy - if you do this, not only have you turned an opponent's weakness into a strength, but you have to almost start from scratch in figuring out how to tactically beat this player.This is why it's important to find more than one way to beat an opponent. There might be one primary tactic, but you need secondary ones as well. Try to match your strengths to the opponent’s weaknesses. Or match your strengths against their "average" shots, or your "average" shots against their weaknesses. But you do want to find the best tactic that works, and use it as often as you can get away with it.With experience, players develop the instinct on how often they can get away with a tactic that works. They also learn the difference between something the opponent simply can't do effectively, and something the opponent will learn to do effectively if given enough chances.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3159title: April 20, 2020 - Sometimes Challenge an Opponent's Strengthdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Sometimes it's a good tactic to go after an opponent's strength. After all, his game is probably based on getting that shot into play, and so you are probably going to have to face it - so rather than have theopponentchoose when he'll use it, why don'tyoupick choose those times?For example, suppose your opponent has a very nice forehand loop. He's going to use the shot; there's no stopping that. You could play into his backhand, but then he could step around to use the forehand, and he gets to choose which shot he wants to do it off of. So why not simply attack his forehand side yourself, and force him to use his strength off a difficult ball, and then come right back to his backhand side, where he now has to play his weaker shot while moving?Or suppose your opponent is a very good blocker. You keep getting stuck in rallies where he's quick-blocking the ball around the table, rushing you and forcing you into mistakes. Since he's going to block anyway, why not throw a slow, deep, spinny loop at him? That's often the most difficult ball for a blocker to quick-block - he has no speed to play off, it's deep so he can't really rush you, and the spin makes it tricky to block. And so rather than getting quick-blocked all over the table by his blocking strength, you'll get a weaker block that you can really attack. You've turned your opponent's strength into a weakness.If a player has a good loop against deep serves to the backhand - whether forehand or backhand - you might be able to turn this into a weakness. If you serve very short to his forehand, he might have to stay closer to the table when receiving then he'd like - and now he gets jammed when you do give him that deep serve to the backhand.Similarly, you can find ways to negate an opponent's strength and turn it into a weakness. When you do so, it's a double-whammy - you've both taken away his strength AND found a weakness!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3157title: April 13, 2020 - The Grinding Mentality - How to Play It and Against Itdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Here is how I would describe the "grinding" mentality. It means a willingness to play as many shots as needed, never missing, while refusing to make a single weak return, whether pushing, chopping, or counter-hitting, with a focus on returning anything that's not smashed or loop-killed, and relying on your reflexes to return some of those. It's primarily a defensive mindset, though grinders will often attack when given the chance. Some counter-hitters can play with this mindset and be pretty aggressive. Some fisher-lobbers styles play this way as well, with the underlying assumption that, to them, when fishing and lobbing they aren't making weak returns, since they are confident they can return the opponent's smashes as long as they keep their balls deep on the table.How do you play against such a style? The keys are patience and decisiveness. If you play a grinder the same way you'd play an attacker, then you'll likely make too many mistakes, which means you are playing right into their game. Instead, you should take your time on your shots and focus on consistency until you get the right shot. After all, unlike when playing an attacker, you aren't fighting for the attack. But when the shot's there, you have to instantly change your mentality and end the point decisively. The difficulty in playing this style is finding that balance between consistency and decisiveness.There are two great ways to learn to play against this type of mindset. The first is obvious - play against this type of player until you are comfortable. The other is to experiment with playing that way yourself, so you can see it from their point of view, and see how vulnerable they actually are, since they are basically letting the opponent dictate much of the play. Not only will you learn to play against that type of style, it'll improve your own consistency and ability to avoid weak returns, which will likely help your own game. So . . . happy grinding!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3155title: April 6, 2020 - Analyze an Unorthodox Style from the Opponent's Point of Viewdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players fear playing unorthodox styles because they both aren't used to and don't know how to play them. Often they spend so much of their mental energy trying to figure out what they should do that they don't consider it from the opponent's point of view. Doing so is a shortcut to finding out whatyoushould do.Here's an example. Suppose you are playing someone with a wristy forehand loop. It's spinny, and the amount of spin and direction are difficult to read. Every time he uses it you have trouble with it. You try to find tactics to avoid letting him use that shot, but this puts you at a disadvantage - you are adjusting your tactics to avoid your opponent's unorthodox shot, which, by definition, should be a weakness - otherwise it would be the norm, anorthodoxshot!So you look at it from the opponent's point of view, and realize that all that wristiness in the shot may give lots of spin and deception, but there's a reason most don't do the shot that way - it's hard to control! Perhaps not against a slow-moving shot, but against a fast incoming one. And then a flashbulb goes off in your head as you realize that your opponent can't really do this shot consistently or effectively if you attack that side, or just play quick shots there, or even serve fast. And so that's what you do!Similarly, whenever you play an unorthodox player, look at it from his point of view. Does he have long pips that give back all your spin? From his point of view, that means he wants you to give him spin to return, but he can't do that with a no-spin ball - so that's what you give him. And so on with all other unorthodox styles. Always remember that if a style is unorthodox, there's a reason for that, and if you look at it from the unorthodox player's point of view, you'll likely find what exactly hedoesn'twant you to do.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3153title: March 30, 2020 - Tactics at the End of a Close Gamedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many think that, at the end of a close game, they should change their tactics because of the score. I remember one player assuring me that, "When it's close, everyone knows you should play safe." When I asked him why that would be the right tactic, he said, "If you play safe, you won't mess up." I pointed out that if that were true, it would be true regardless of the score. He argued back that when it's close, you'll make more mistakes, so it's best to play safe. I asked him whether, under pressure, a player would be more nervous going for a consistent attack - where he is in control of what he's doing - or having to react to the opponent's attack, where he's not in control, and so is facing the unknown. He didn't have an answer for that, and didn't seem to get the idea that if you play safe, the opponent gets to play aggressive, and in the modern game of table tennis, the aggressor usually wins - and even more so under pressure!So what should you do differently when it is close? Say the score is deuce in the fifth. There are only two things that change here.First ispsychological. If you are nervous, then you are likely to make more mistakes than usual. That sort of plays into the myth of "Play safe when it's close," except it doesn't take into account that: 1) the opponent might be even more nervous; 2) a nervous player likely makes more mistakes reacting to an opponent's shot (i.e. his attack) then attacking himself; and 3) the best way to overcome nervousness when it's close is to play your game, whether attacking or not, and so get used to playing under pressure. So in general, when it's close, it's best to take the initiative, using whatever part of your game you do best - and that usually means playing aggressively. (The attacker is taking the "risk" of taking the first shot, where if he misses the opponent doesn't even have to react to his shot, but this is usually more than offset by the factors given above. The exception, of course, is for a defensive player, who might want to focus on his defense and let the other guy make a mistake.)Second istactical, as in "No hold back." It's time now to use whatever worked before. If you have a serve that's worked well throughout the match, which you've been holding back on some so the opponent won't get used to it, now is the time to bring it out. Some players hesitate to do so, thinking the opponent will be expecting it, and that's occasionally true. However, the great majority of the time he won't be sure, and if he had trouble before, he'll probably have trouble again. If you don't use it, the likely scenario is that, after the match, he'll wonder why you didn't use that serve at the end, and if you lose, you'll be kicking yourself over not using it - and rightfully so. If a certain serve, stroke, or placement gave the opponent trouble, now's the time to use it! In general, with experience you get a feel for what tactics to bring back at the end of a close game.Ultimately, the best tactic at the end of a close game is more long-term strategic - play lots of matches so you are often playing close games, maybe even play improvised games where you start each game at deuce. Then you will become comfortable and experienced in what to do in a close game, and the tactics will come naturally.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3151title: March 23, 2020 - Ten Table Tennis Truisms: Larry's Lawsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you can't do it in your sleep, you can't do it consistently in a match.Practice everything in your game, but focus on your strengths and weaknesses. Remove the weaknesses and turn the strengths into overpowering ones.At the higher levels, if you can see it, loop it; if you can't see it, either reflex block or back up so you have time to loop it.Most players block better on the backhand. So focus on attacking the forehand and middle.If you push quick, heavy, low, wide, and deep, and can hide or change directions at the last second, and you do all of these things pretty well, you have a great push. If you do most of these things great but aren't good at one or two of them, you have a weak push.There are only three things in table tennis: move to the ball, get the right racket angle, and stroke. Do these well and you're the best in the world.If you improve your game, and start challenging better players, for about six months you will lose most close games in big matches to them because the other guy has more experience at that level. Keep at it and you'll start winning those close games.If players spent as much time practicing serves as they did complaining about having trouble with the other guy's serve, then the other guy would be the one complaining about having trouble with your serve.After every match ask yourself what you did to win and lose points. Then practice to do more of one and less of the other.There is no such thing as a weird style, just weak styles that you aren't used to.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3149title: March 16, 2020 - Practice Attacking the Middle in Rote Drillsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the toughest things to make a habit of in a match is attacking the middle. (That's the midpoint between backhand and forehand, roughly the playing elbow.) There are two primary reasons for this. First, it's a smaller and moving target than the corners, which are easier to attack.But there's a bigger reason - players don'tpracticeattacking the middle. How often have you practiced your forehand or backhand, going crosscourt or down the line? When you play a match, guess what? You will tend to do what you did in practice, and so you'll go crosscourt or down the line. If you want to learn to attack the middle in a match, then you have topracticeit.So instead of always doing corner-to-corner drills, have your partner block from where his middle would be, with either his forehand or his backhand. Develop the habit of going to that spot bypracticinggoing to that spot.You should also do other drills where you attack the middle, such as serve and loop to the middle. But it starts with repetitive drills where you make it a habit to attack the middle, so that when you play a match . . . it'll be a habit to attack the middle.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3147title: March 9, 2020 - Proper Forehand Technique - Circling and From Sidedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Here's a video(3:56) of all-time great Ma Long looping forehand, including slow motion. (It starts with one backhand loop - which you should also study! - and then goes to forehands.)Note in the video how he basically rotates his body around an imaginary vertical rod going through the top of his head, with his head only moving slightly forward, and how he contacts the ball almost directly to the side of his body? Many players violate one of these principles, either moving the body forward too much as they do the shot, or (even more common) contacting the ball too far in front.There are times when you should move the body more forward on a shot, such as against an easy high ball or when you are rushed in stepping around the backhand corner, but normally you should go more in a circle. This both gives you great centripetal force as you rotate around, but also leaves you in position for the next shot, balanced and ready, which is how top players can play power shots over and over in quick succession.But as noted above, the more common problem is that players tend to contact the ball too far in front. This either keeps them from rotating backwards fully (and so losing power), or forces them to reach for the ball (thereby dissipating power and putting you off balance).Also note how the legs (and especially the knees) are used to rotate into the shot. The legs aren't just for standing; they are the primary start to every shot, and give you the pivot into your shots.Here's a13-second videoof Japanese sensation Tomokazu Harimoto as a kid, knocking balls off a table. (He's now world #5, and the best in the world outside China, circa March 2020.) Note the same principle - he rotates in a circle and contacts the ball directly to the side of that imaginary rod going through his head. You can see the same principles in this46-second videoof 3-time World Men's Singles Champion Wang Liqin (2001, 2005, 2007), demonstrating "The shot that owned a decade."===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3145title: March 2, 2020 - Drill the Fundamentals and the Specificsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:It is important to drill the fundamentals into your game until you can do them in your sleep. But often players forget to practice specifically what they do in a match. For example, I know a player who likes to counterloop with his forehand. He spends a lot of time practicing counterlooping with counterlooping practice partners. But in matches he has trouble counterlooping against an opponent's first loop off underspin, which is usually done closer to the table than other loops, has a different arc, and usually more topspin.A simple drill to practice against this would be to have a practice partner serve backspin, the player pushes it back, the partner loops, and the player counterloops. The partner doesn't play out the point; as soon as he finishes his loop, he reaches for a ball from a box. (It's an improvised version of multiball.) This matches what a player faces in a match, as opposed to just counterlooping, and it gives far more practice on this specific skill in a given time than just playing out points. Plus, your partner gets lots of practice looping against backspin!So work on your fundamentals, but also look at what you actually do in a match - or need to do - and find drills that match that specifically, and perfect the skill.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3143title: February 24, 2020 - Fundamental versus Creative Tacticsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Fundamental tactics are the standards used against specific playing styles. If you are playing a chopper, fundamental tactics include attacking the middle (roughly the elbow, the transition point between his forehand and backhand chops), moving him in and out, giving dead balls to a side with long pips, or mixing up your spins (especially to the inverted chopping side). If you are playing a looper, a fundamental tactic would be to serve short and return short serves back short, so he can't loop, or to go to his stronger looping side to bring him out of position so you can then go to his weaker side.You can learn fundamental tactics talking to other players or coaches; watching others; experimenting; or evenby reading about it.While fundamental tactics are key, it's also helpful to learn to be creative. Everyone plays different, and everyone has different weaknesses. That means studying opponents and finding what specifically gives them trouble.Perhaps your opponent has a less common grip - say, the Seemiller grip, where he uses one side for both forehand and backhand. If you attack the middle like you should against most shakehand players, you might not do so well, since the Seemiller grip is very strong against these middle shots. But it's usually not as good against shots to the wide corners, especially the wide forehand. They often have trouble with the wide backhand as well, but make up for this by standing well over to that side, turning that into a strength, but leaving the forehand a little more open. But most players just automatically play to their backhand. So watch how this player stands, and go after those corners - perhaps going to the wide forehand first, then back to the backhand, which is now open. (This grip also has trouble backhand looping, so you might take advantage of that as well.)Or perhaps he puts his finger down the middle. Some players with this grip have trouble returning short balls to the forehand down the line - he'll likely be forced to go crosscourt, since it's often harder to bring the wrist back with this grip. So you test it - serve short to the forehand, and if it works, you can camp out on the forehand side for the return. (Some have no trouble going down the line, so test it out.)Or suppose you're playing a chopper who returns your attack to his middle with ease. Then he's probably cheating over - meaning his middle is more toward his forehand side, and his wide backhand is open. So you punish him with those two spots, which are now far apart and hard to cover.Or suppose he's a looper, and so you don't want to serve long to him, giving him the loop. But test him on this. If he's like me, then he might loop some serves really well, but struggle with others. (I always had trouble looping deep serves with backhand-serve type sidespin.)The goal is to early in a match find out what fundamental and creative tactics work. If you combine these two, you'll become a master tactician!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3141title: February 17, 2020 - Footwork: Wide Stance and Two-Step?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The history of footwork in table tennis could take up a book by itself. If you watch videos of the best players in the world every 20 years or so, you can see the footwork techniques developing, though some of it is subtle and hard to pinpoint.But one thing has been established at the world-class level since at least the 1960s - the best players almost all have wide stances. This gives greater stability and power to their shots while allowing great mobility. When moving, they often move both feet together. However, this is the result of years of training, especially physical training. Unless you are in good shape, using such a wide stance can be difficult. Find the right balance for you, which usually means as wide as you find comfortable.Most footwork involves shuffling. Watch videos in slow motion of top players to see this, and how their feet move almost together. But for most of us, it's usually better to use what's called two-step footwork. Let's suppose you are a righty and want to move to your left.Start with a neutral stance - left leg slightly forward, knees bent, weight on the inside balls of the feet, relaxed. Your first move should be a short step to the left with your left foot. Next, by first pulling with the left leg, you shuffle to your left, with both feet now moving together, almost a jumping motion except your feet almost brush across the floor. As you get better and better, the short step and the follow-up shuffle become closer and closer until they are almost one movement.To move to the right, do the opposite - start with a short step with the right foot, then shuffle both feet together.If stepping around the backhand corner to play a forehand, when shuffling both feet together (after the initial short step with the left), make sure your right foot swings far enough around (i.e. backwards, relative to you) so that you won't be cramped on your shot. Rotate your shoulders as your right foot goes around so that you end up with your shoulders at least parallel to the direction you are going to hit. Pull the playing arm back as you step around. Most of your weight should now be on your right foot. You are now in perfect position to attack with your foreland. Step into the shot with your left foot while rotating your shoulders, and either loop or smash. Make sure to finish the shot balanced so you can quickly move back in position for the next shot. If you don't follow through back into position, you will be out of position for the next shot.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3139title: February 10, 2020 - Stepping Around the Backhand Cornerdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Since the forehand is generally more powerful than the backhand, as well as better for smashing high balls, it is often important to be able to use the forehand out of the backhand corner. An inability to do weakens your game. Of course, some players are not fast enough to do this regularly, but even they should consider doing this against certain shots.Stepping around the backhand involves five parts: (1) Setting up the shot, (2) assessing whether to step around or not, (3) the footwork itself, (4) the shot itself, and (5) return to ready position.Getting a shot to step around on involves good shot selection on your part, ball placement, and quick judgment. Generally, there are four shots that you might step around the backhand to use the forehand against: pop-ups, pushes, blocks or weak drives, and deep serves. Pop-ups are the easiest as they allow the most time to move into position. Blocks and pushes are more difficult because you will have less time to react.Generally don't move until your opponent is committed - the better the player, the longer you have to wait since a good player can fake or change his direction at the last moment.You can anticipate most pushes going to the backhand as your opponent often doesn't want to give you a forehand shot by pushing that way. Of course, besides direction, you will have to judge the depth of the return or you might find yourself trying to loop a ball that lands short.Unless your opponent is very predictable, you will have difficulty anticipating where his block or drive is going. You'll just have to wait for him to commit, and then, if he goes to your backhand, you'll have to quickly decide if you should step around for it. The important thing is to force a weak return that you can step around on (or perhaps not, if the return doesn't go to the backhand). There are many ways to do this, such as spin (especially heavy topspin), speed, quickness, ball placement, shot selection, varying the speed and spin of your shot, and, of course, tricky serves. Experiment and see how and where your shots are returned. For example, if you are in a backhand-to-backhand exchange and you suddenly hit a quick one to your opponent's middle (his playing elbow), you might force a weak return to the backhand that probably won't be too angled. Be ready to step around, but be careful - he may go down your forehand line at the last second and all you'll be able to do is applaud his fine play.If you have a strong forehand (relative to your backhand) but rarely step around your backhand, you will not be taking full advantage of the natural strength and power of the forehand, therefore handicapping your game. Turn your forehand into an all-table weapon!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3137title: February 3, 2020 - Did He Really Force You Out of Position?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Players are often caught out of position, leading to the opponent hitting an easy winner to an open part of the table as you lunge for the ball. But did he reallyforceyou out of position?For example, suppose the opponent finds a chance to hit an angled ball to your wide forehand. You run it down, but before you can get back into position, your opponent has blocked a winner to your wide backhand, and you can only wave at the ball and say, "Nice tactic." But did he reallyforceyou out of position, or did youallowit?Most often, when the above happens, it's not really because of what the opponent did, but because of one of two thingsyoudidn't do.First, were you really in position to cover the forehand on the first shot there? Often a player isn't positioned well, and so when the ball goes the forehand (in this example), he gets a late start, and so is already almost lunging for the ball. Result? Even if you make the return, your momentum keeps you from making a quick return back into position, leaving your wide backhand open.Second, while making the return from the forehand side - key word iswhile, notafter- were you pushing yourself back into position with your right leg (for righties) so that you'd follow through back to the table? Many players finish their stroke, including their follow-through, andthenstart their return to position. Instead, returning to the table should be part of the follow-through.If you fix these two problems, then your opponents will find it much, much harder to force you out of position, since he hadn't been doing so before - you had been doing that all by yourself!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3135title: January 27, 2020 - Looping Slightly Long Ballsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When a student pushes against a slightly long serve ("half long") or push, I almost always remind them that they should usually loop such balls. Inevitably, the player will respond, "The ball was too short, I couldn't loop it!" But the ball was long, they just didn't read the depth quite right.How do you learn to read and loop slightly long balls? Here are three tips.First, practice. Get a coach or practice partner and have them serve to you where they try to make the second bounce right about the end of your table. Your job is to either loop it or let it go. If you think it's too short to loop, by letting it go you get feedback on whether itreallywas too short to loop. You'll be amazed at how often it really was long enough to loop.Second, a serve doesn't have to be truly long for you to loop it. A loop is a forward stroke (as well as up), even against backspin, and so you can go over the table some. If the second bounce is at about the table's edge, you can loop it.Third, jam the table a bit. You can read and loop these serves better if you are looking more down on them than if you are hanging back and seeing it at an angle. As soon as you see the ball coming somewhat short, move in - which means stepping in with your left leg (for righties). This also puts you in a better position to loop with power to all parts of the table - if you are farther from the table, you'll likely only be able to loop with power to the left (for a righty). So loop away!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3133title: January 20, 2020 - Whenever You Miss, Shadow Strokedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:This is a bafflingly simple and short tip. I'm always amazed that when a player misses a shot, he expects it to fix itself. Instead, whenever you miss a shot, make a habit of shadow-practicing the shot as you should have done it. For example, if you loop off the end, shadow-practice how you should have looped it against that incoming ball. Over the decades I've played and coached, I've seen the obvious correlation between developing players who do this, and players who improve the fastest. Guess what? If you do this regularly, then like magic, you'll start doing it right, and you'll improve. It's either magic or the habit of shadow-practicing. Which is it?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3131title: January 13, 2020 - Don't Learn to Play Every Style - Learn to Adjustdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players believe that they need to learn to play every style. Well, according to my calculations, there are as many playing styles as there are players in the world. No, you don't need to learn to play every style.It's true that it's helpful to understand how to play the major types of styles. Note how I saidunderstand. That's because a tactic that works against one player of a particular style might not work against another of that general style, and if you don't understand the reason for the tactic, you'll have trouble adjusting to many players. For example, most choppers are weak in the middle, around their elbow area where they have to transition from backhand to forehand and vice versa. (Most players are weak there, but choppers more than most.) But some very defensive choppers have learned to cover well over half the table with their backhand chops, and so if you go to their apparent middle, you give them an easy chop. Instead, you'd need to go toward their forehand side, where their true middle is. If you don't understand the reason for going to the middle, then you wouldn't be able to adjust to this chopper, especially on the fly in the middle of a match. (It's after the match that you'd realize what happened and would pound your head in frustration.)No, you do not need to know how to play every style. What you need to learn to do isadjustto any style. It should take you one or two rallies to have figured out where the true middle of that defensive chopper described above is. But if you blindly played the middle because that's how you are supposed to play choppers, it might have taken you a lot longer to figure it out, if you ever did. I've seen entire matches at relatively high levels where strong players never did figure out such seemingly obvious things because they were blindly going with conventional tactics rather than understanding and adjusting them for a given match.Your job early in a match - or before the match, if you can scout the player or ask others about him - is to figure out how to play this player. Try forcing your own style on him, but with adjustments for how he plays. If you make this a habit, it becomes easier and easier, until it's basic instinct. And when tactics become almost instinctive, that's when you can most easily let yourself go and play in the zone.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3129title: January 6, 2020 - How to Develop a Nasty Forehand Flipdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:A nice forehand flip is a valuable weapon, especially if you can also flip with the backhand (which is usually easer than a forehand flip). It means that you can attack any short serve, so opposing servers are in constant danger. (If they serve long, then it's an even easier attack - you loop.) How do you develop one?First, find a good coach or top player who can teach you proper technique and feed multiball. A few key tips:Watch videos - go to Youtube and search for "table tennis forehand flip." (It's also called a flick, especially in Europe.)Step in with your right foot (for righties), with left hand up some for balance.Keep racket tip low.Normally contact the ball at the top of the bounce, though some take it on the rise to rush the opponent.Put topspin on your flips, especially against backspin. Against no-spin or topspin, contact the ball more towards the top of the ball with a more forward stroke. Some players think of flipping as a "mini-loop." (Some players develop a flatter, usually slower flip, as a variation. That can be effective, but it should be a variation, not the primary flip.)When practicing, immediately step back into a normal ready position. Except perhaps when you are first learning, consider stepping in and back out as part of the stroke. You'll find this in-out footwork among the most physically demanding in table tennis - but remember that it's an Olympic sport!When flipping crosscourt, you can either flip aggressively to the corner, or go for extreme angles.To go down the line or to the middle, bring forearm and wrist back.If you establish an aggressive crosscourt flip (righty vs righty or lefty vs lefty), then just the threat forces the opponent to guard against that angle - and so all you have to do is flip consistently down the line to force a backhand exchange and take away the opponent's serving advantage.Unless the ball is high, you should rarely flip-kill. Focus on consistency and placement to take control of the rally.Many players practice and become proficient at certain types of flips, but not others. For example, during my developing years I practiced and developed a very strong forehand flip against short backspin and short side-top serves. But I never really practiced against short no-spin, and the result is that, to this day, I don't flip very well against no-spin balls. (A few rivals figured this out in matches against me, and I lost matches because of it. But I was a terror flipping short serves that had spin!) Others only develop, for example, a crosscourt flip, and so can't disarm an opponent with a simple down-the-line flip, or by going after the middle.Now it's time to practice. Here's a ten-step progression. (If you can't find someone to feed multiball, then you can improvise and simply have your practice partner serve short. But multiball is the more efficient, quicker way to perfect the shot.)Have coach feed multiball, short to forehand, with light backspin. You flip crosscourt.Have coach feed multiball, short to forehand, with heavy backspin. You flip crosscourt.Have coach feed multiball, short to forehand, with no spin. You flip crosscourt.Have coach feed multiball, short to forehand, with light backspin. You flip down the line.Have coach feed multiball, all short to forehand, with light backspin. You flip to where opponent's middle would be. You must step back after each shot into a normal ready position after each flip.Have coach mix up the spins on the short ball to the forehand. You flip to all parts of the table.Have coach alternate a short ball to the forehand, and a long ball to the backhand.Have coach randomly feed short to the forehand or long to the backhand.Have coach randomly feed short to the forehand or long to the backhand, and follow with two random topspins.Play games where both servers can only serve short to the forehand, and receiver must flip to anywhere on the table.After you are comfortable with all ten steps above, play regular games with players who at least sometimes serve short to the forehand, and flip those every chance. Remember - unless the serve is high, the goal of the flip is to take control of the rally, not win it with one shot.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3127title: December 9, 2019 - Six Ways to Learn Tacticsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Constantly think about it. What works for you, and against what types players? What works for others against you, and how can you adjust to it? You should constantly experiment and learn from it.Study others. What do your opponents do against you? What do they do against others? Watch top players on video and see what they do. Learn from it all.Coach others in matches. One of the best ways to learn tactical thinking is to coach others. It forces you to really observe what's going on in a match - the two-way back and forth between two opponents - and think about what your player can and should do to win the match. This carries over into your own matches, where you might not be in the habit of really observing what's going on and thinking about what you should do to win the match. Plus it exposes you to tactics by other players that you may adapt for yourself.Receive coaching in matches. A coach or top player can likely pinpoint what you need to do to win a given match. Learn from them.Listen in when coaches coach others. You might need to ask permission first, but you can learn a treasure trove of tactical skills by listening to a top coach as he talks to a player during a match, where you aren't "distracted" by being in the middle of a match yourself. It's a quick way to learn what's most important as an experienced coach will zero in on that.Read about it. I'd be remiss if I didn't mention my book,Table Tennis Tactics for Thinkers!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3125title: December 2, 2019 - What to Watch During a Pointdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you watched the movie Forrest Gump, you were told to "Never, ever take your eye off the ball." And some really do this. But is this what you really want to do?Some find that watching the ball constantly helps them focus. And in the short term, perhaps that's best for some players. But you are handicapping yourself if you constantly watch the ball throughout every rally. Here's a breakdown of what you really should be watching during a point. Note that even if you are watching the ball, you can still be somewhat aware of your opponent through your peripheral vision.As the opponent is serving.Watch his racket right up until contact. This allows you to see how the racket is moving just before contact, so you can better read the spin. If he does a high-toss serve you might glance up to see how high it goes so as to better know when contact will be made.As the ball is coming to you. Watch the ball closely from the time the opponent contacts the ball, including on the serve. On most shots you should watch the incoming ball right until contact. (Technically, you can't do this with most backhand shots since the racket is between your eyes and the ball, but you can watch the ball almost until contact.) Against a fast, incoming ball, you can't really make any last-second changes, so there's no point in watching the ball right until contact - it's better to get a very good look at it as it approaches. This is especially true when blocking against a hard-hit shot.After you've hit the ball. (This includes when you serve.) After you hit the ball, there's no point in watching the ball travel away from you. It's far more important to watch the opponent to see what he's going to do. For example, on the forehand side you can often see where he's going to hit the ball by his shoulder rotation. In any case you should be able to see what he's going to do during his forward swing before he contacts the ball. Some players telegraph their shots early; others only at the last second. Adjust to both. If you only watch the ball, then you can't really react to the opponent until after contact, which puts you at a disadvantage.Now go back and watch Forrest Gump and you'll notice something interesting - he not only watches the ball constantly, but he never even blinks during rallies. That's taking "never, ever take your eye off the ball" to an extreme! We can learn a lot from Forrest's basic humanity, but we probably shouldn't be taking our table tennis cues from him - for one thing, he has awful strokes. He's not actually rallying - he's just going through the motions, with the ball added afterwards by computer.Here's the video(2:55) on how they put together the ping-pong scenes.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3123title: November 25, 2019 - Serving from the Forehand Sidedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you watch the top players serve, one thing you'll notice is that the vast majority of them serve various types of forehand pendulum serves mostly from the backhand side. There's a reason for this - it puts them in a better position for the next shot, especially if they want to favor the forehand if they get a weak return. It also allows them to get used to a limited number of returns - if they serve from the forehand side, they have to get used to returns that come at them differently. But players do this so mind-numbingly often that receivers are used to this type of serving. (Some top players do use tomahawk or even backhand serves from the forehand side, but these are relatively rare.)A few years ago Baltimore Orioles star shortstop J.J. Hardy visited the Maryland Table Tennis Center. He was probably the best table tennis player in non-table tennis professional sports, at least in the U.S. - about 1850-1900 level. He had strong shots from both wings, but had one very unorthodox thing - his best serve was a forehand pendulum serve from the forehand side. Against MDTTC players, over and over they struggled with this serve since they had literally never seen it coming at them from this angle before! The ultimate test was when J.J. played against a 2400 player - and he struggled with the serve as well. As he put it, "I've never seen anyone serve that serve from the forehand side."There are a number of advantages of serving from the forehand side. Here's a listing. (For this, I'm assuming both players are righties or both lefties.)It forces the receiver to adjust to a serve he rarely sees.It gives an angle into the short forehand, so that you can serve there and force an opponent with a good backhand flip to receive forehand. If you serve short to the forehand from the backhand side, there's no angle, and so the receiver can just reach over and flip with the backhand. If a receiver tries to "cheat" and move over to receive backhand, you can serve quick down the line and catch him out of position.Against players below the top levels, many players can't receive effectively down the line against a serve short to the forehand. And so you can serve from the forehand side short to the forehand and then just camp out on that side, following your serve up with a big forehand.If you are a strong two-winged player, the serve leaves you in perfect position to follow the serve up from both wings, depending on the return.A tomahawk serve from the forehand side that breaks wide to the receiver's forehand, but goes off the side of the table so that the table is in the way of the receiver, is an extremely effective serve. It's very hard to loop, since the table is in the way. Lefties do this all the time to righties, serving forehand pendulum serves from their backhands that break outside the righties forehand side, with the table in the way. The serve can be effective even if done very deep. Because it breaks away from the receiver, he tends to reach for the ball, causing two problems - first, he loses control as he lunges for the ball, and second, he tends to lower his racket as he reaches, and so lifts the ball off the end.So why not take a couple steps over and experiment with these serves? And if they work for you, then that's one more tool in your tactical toolbox.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3121title: November 18, 2019 - "Proper Way" is What Works for Youdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Kids are almost always taught the "proper way" to play by coaches. But older players sometimes already have bad habits or have developed an unconventional playing style. Should they also be taught the "proper way" to play?The answer is . . . it depends. Some older players may simply want to play like the top players. An older player who is a good physical athlete might also want to learn to play like the top players, i.e. the "proper way," since they have the athleticism to do so, even if they are learning it late. In general, if you want to become a good player, it's usually best to learn the "proper way," and focus on learning the tried and true techniques that are used by top players.And yet . . . this isn't true for everyone. If you've spent years trying to develop a strong forehand and failed, but have developed a really good backhand and a nice blocking game, perhaps you should forget much of the "proper way" and focus on dominating with your backhand and blocking game. This doesn't mean you should stop trying to develop your forehand - the better it gets, the better you'll be - but perhaps, at this point, it's best to focus on having a forehand that doesn't lose for you, and then you can win with your backhand and blocking. Or pushing. Or whatever else you actually do well.Similarly, if there's a technical flaw in one of your strokes, but you've done this shot that way so long that it's ingrained, it might be better to just go with that shot, and learn the rest of your game the "proper way."There's nothing wrong with having something unique in your game that isn't the "proper way" - in fact, it'll win you matches since opponents aren't used to it. However, it's best not to go overboard. Surround these unorthodox strokes or tactics with an otherwise solid game i.e. the "proper way" - and you may reach a higher level than if you just mindlessly try to play the way the top players play.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3119title: November 11, 2019 - Three Spots or Two?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When a coach refers to "playing the three spots," he's referring to playing both wide angles, and the middle. (The middle is not the middle of the table; it's the mid-point between the opponent's forehand and backhand, usually around his playing elbow.)In any match, you should be playing all three of these spots. The only question is how often to go to each spot, and what types of shots to each. For example, a weak ball to the middle makes it easy for the opponent to set up his best shot (such as a big forehand or backhand loop), and so going to the middle is mostly effective when you attack it. Against a player with a big forehand, you'd only go to the forehand when the opponent is out of position or to draw him out of position. And so on.But many players are what I call "two-spot" players - players where you mostly want to focus on two spots. For example, against a player with a big forehand but a weaker backhand, you might want to pin them down on the backhand by attacking that side. But if you only go to one spot, then the opponent's weaker side might just get warmed up and won't be so weak. So it'd be better to go to the backhand and middle (perhaps a touch to the backhand side, to avoid that big forehand), and force the opponent to move side to side with his weaker backhand.If you play a player with the Seemiller grip or convention penhold - these players use only one side of their racket - they often have less middle weakness, and so you might focus on going to the wide corners. (This is almost always true against a Seemiller player. Some conventional penholders can be weak in the middle.)Against a player with a strong backhand but less powerful forehand, you might focus on moving him around on the forehand side, and so focus on going to the wide forehand and middle (perhaps slightly to the forehand side).So try to find out in matches what type of an opponent you are facing, one where you want to go regularly to all three spots, or focus on two.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3117title: November 4, 2019 - How to Push Extremely Heavydate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:A heavy push can cause havoc when done at the right time, and sometimes is all that's needed to take away an opponent's effective attack. How do you do this shot?First, keep in mind that it's not enough to just have lots of backspin. It also needs to be low, deep (unless you are pushing short, a different type of push that usually isn't as heavy), well-placed (usually to a wide corner, sometimes to the middle against a two-winged looper), deceptive (sometimes aim one way then go the other), and somewhat quick to rush the opponent (either off the bounce, with some pace, or both).To get that extra bite on your heavy push, here are some tips.Use wrist. Bring the wrist back before contact and then use both wrist and forearm to smoothly accelerate the racket.Accelerate through contact. You want the racket accelerating right through contact.Graze the ball with a relatively open racket. The more you graze the ball, the more spin you'll get. In fact, if you graze it enough, you'll have to put extra energy into the shot to make it go deep, since most of that energy is going into spin.Grippy rubber. You simply get more spin with a spinny rubber.How do you develop this shot? Practice! You can do this both with regular practice and in games. One mistake many make is having two players both practicing their heavy push at the same time. Result? You develop a really nice heavy push against an incoming heavy push - and then, in games, you pop the ball up against serves and pushes that aren't equally loaded. The best way to develop your heavy push might be to have someone practice their serves, where they vary from heavy backspin, side-backspin, and no-spin, and you learn to push heavy against all of them. (Chop down against no-spin to keep it low. You can even push against short topspin/sidespin serves by chopping down at contact.)Then, as the ultimate practice, try to win practice matches with your newly-developing heavy push. Find someone who likes to serve short and then loop, and see if you can win by loading up your receives with heavy backspin - but remember to push deep, well-placed, deceptive, and quick & fast!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3115title: October 28, 2019 - A Lightbulb in Your Head: Mindless Swinging or Tactical Shot-making?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When you see a top player go for - and usually make - a big shot, is it mindless swinging or tactical shot-making? Actually, it's both.There are two times when a top player normally goes for a big shot. First, of course, is against a weak ball. From years of training, they are mindlessly efficient at putting anything weak away - and that's not only high balls, but also balls that don't put any type of pressure on the player - from speed, spin, placement, depth, deception, or even extreme lowness.But sometimes a top player will also rip a winner off a seemingly difficult ball. Is this a mindless, perhaps brainless lucky shot? Sometimes yes, but other times it's because, despite the seeming difficulty of the shot, the player instinctively reads the ball perfectly and is in perfect position, and so is not only able to make the shot, butknowshe can make the shot. Two examples might be an opponent who smashes or loop kills the ball right into the player's middle forehand, allowing a relatively "easy" countersmash or counterloop; or perhaps a low, heavy, deep, and angled push - but the player simply reads it perfectly and is in perfect position for the shot, and instinctively realizes this, and so he takes (and usually makes) the shot. It's as if a lightbulb has gone off in his head telling him to take the shot.And so these seemingly mindless shots are actually high-percentage tactical shots, but only because of years and years of practice and training. And yet . . . they are also mindless. Why? Because, as with all table tennis shots, it is the trained subconscious that guides these shots. The conscious mind just gets in the way. And so while it might be years of training that allows the player to do these shots, the shots themselves are essentially done mindlessly.How does this apply to non-top players (or top player wannabes)? You too should be training to make these shots. This doesn't mean you should constantly be looking to rip winners (except off weak balls - though even there it's best to only go at maybe 80% and rely just as much on placement), but that you should jump on balls that, after enough training, you realize you have read and are in position for, and then make strong shots. As you get better, your shots will get stronger and stronger . . . until, one day, you might be that "top player" making those "mindless shots."I often undergo this "lightbulb going off" in my head that tells me that I've read a ball perfectly and am in perfect position for it (as well as when I get a "weak" ball), and when I do, I take the shot - and it usually hits. You too can develop this "lightbulb" instinct. Alas, for most non-top players who often go for big shots, there is no lightbulb going off, and it is just mindless swinging, with little distinguishing between whether they've really read the ball or are in position for the shot - and so their shots are erratic and low-percentage. How to overcome this? Slow down your attacks except when you really see a weak ball or are certain you've read the ball perfectly and are in position for the shot, and soon distinguishing these type of shots will become subconscious habit - and that lightbulb will start to go off in your head.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3113title: October 21, 2019 - How to Stop the Short Receivedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the most effective ways to return a short serve is to push it back short and low, making it hard for the server to attack. This is very common at the higher levels, but even at lower levels there are players who do this. How can a server overcome this? Here are six ways.Serve long. This makes the serve easier to attack (mostly by looping), but not all players can attack deeps serves effectively, especially if the long serves are mixed in occasionally. Just the threat of a long serve keeps the receiver from stepping in too soon against short serves, which makes their short receive more erratic.Aggressive half-long serves. A half-long serve is a serve that, given the chance, the second bounce would bounce near the end of the table. This is the deepest serve you can do and still keep it short. This makes it very difficult for the receiver to loop, and as difficult as possible to push short. This is the most common serve at the higher levels. Ideally, serve it aggressively, so it comes at the receiver somewhat fast and low, yet still bounces twice.Backspin/No-Spin. A short, low backspin serve is difficult to attack but is the easiest serve to push short. But if you mix in no-spin serves, the receiver will often misread it and push the serve back high. The key to a no-spin serve is to serve just like a backspin, but instead of grazing the ball near the racket tip, contact it near the handle, where the racket is moving slowly. Even if you graze it there, it'll have little spin, but it'll look like regular backspin. This is often the most common serving tactic at the higher levels.Short Side-Top. With practice, you can learn to serve short sidespin/topspin serves that land short (usually half-long). But because it goes short, many receivers will read them as backspin and try to push them, and so they pop up. Even if they read the serve and chop down to keep it from popping up, the ball will usually come out deep.Make them Receive Forehand. Many players have far more touch with their backhand push than their forehand push. So try serving short to the forehand. If they reach over and push with their backhand, try serving from the middle or forehand side of the table, so you have an angle into their short forehand. If they still reach over and receive backhand, develop a deep serve to the backhand that you can do with the same motion, so the receiver has to watch for that, forcing them to receive forehand against short serves to the forehand.Develop a Really Good Flip. If the receiver is going to push your serves back short, then learn to reach in and attack it! Punish them if the short push goes the least bit high - and many do - and use quickness and placement when attacking the others.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3111title: October 14, 2019 - React to Opponent's Forward Swingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When you watch a top player, they seem to have almost supernatural reflexes. The other guy will crush the ball, and whether he gets it back or not, he always seems to react instantly. How does he do this?The secret is he's not reacting to the incoming ball; he's reacting to the opponent's forward swing. If you wait until the opponent hits the ball before you react, you will have human reflexes. If you instead constantly watch opponents and try to react to where they are going from their forward swing, you will develop supernatural reflexes - or seem to.You don't have to do this with every shot, only when the opponent is attacking strongly, or when you are trying to cover most of the table with your stronger side (such as the forehand). In both of these cases it's important to react and move quickly, before the opponent actually hits the ball.Some opponents do last-second changes of direction, so you have to learn at what point the opponent is committed to a shot and direction. Usually if an opponent tries to be deceptive about this he has to slow down his shots, so you don't have to react as quickly anyway, and so can wait longer. But at some point in every player's forward swing he has to commit to a direction, and so it is your job to figure out when that is, and learn to reflexively react to that.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3108title: October 7, 2019 - Top Ten Reasons You Might Not Be as Good at Table Tennis as You Could Bedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:You have faced really good serves and yet have made no serious attempt to learn them yourself.You don't think you have enough talent, when long-term training almost always overcomes any such lack of talent.You've mistaken your bad playing habits for playing style.You've developed playing habits that allow you to win now against players around your level, but don't work well against stronger players, and you simply can't bring yourself to change the way you play and risk losing against your peers.You mostly play games instead of doing drills that focus on specific aspects of the game that you need to work on.You are too nervous in tournament or league matches because you've never studiedSports Psychology.You are strongly opinionated about how the game is played and so don't learn from coaches and top players.You have the physical fitness of a couch potato.You don't practice as much as you should - which not only would make you better, but would improve your physical fitness.You have nice strokes but don't really know how to use them. SeeLearning to Win, or perhaps a book on Tactics - likeTable Tennis Tactics for Thinkers!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3106title: September 30, 2019 - Confidence, Then Consistency!date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players practice hard to develop consistency, and from this consistency they develop confidence. This is backwards! Be confident first, and then, with practice, consistency will come. Believe you can do it, and you will. (Or, for you realists, you will at least do as well as you physically can.)What causes a person to miss "easy" shots? Usually it's because of a very small, almost insignificant loss of confidence, which leads you to slightly guide the shot, rather than just let your trained subconscious control the shot.When you go for a shot, your brain sends nerve impulses (electric impulses) to the muscle cells, ordering them to contract in certain ways. The order, intensity, and duration of the impulses control the manner in which the muscle fibers contract. There is no way you can control this complicated set of directions consciously. Only by training can the brain's subconscious areas learn the exact set of nerve impulses to be sent in a given situation. Any conscious control throws the whole set of impulses into disarray, leading to mistakes.Instead, remember making the shot in the past and what it felt like. At first, you should copy what a top player does. But once you've made the shot once, there is no reason why you shouldn't make it every time! YOU CAN! (And if you believe that, then you are well on your way toward improving the shot.) If you do miss one, don't worry about that miss - immediately think about a time when you made that shot, then perhaps shadow-practice it, and then, more than likely, you'll make it next time.Confidence allows you to let go consciously and let your subconscious brain do what it's been taught (or is being taught) to do. Good players think between points, but never during a point. Just blank out your mind during a rally and watch what happens. Let your subconscious do the work while you get the credit!So believe in your shots, even if there is no logical reason to. Have confidence in your shots. KNOW that your shot CANNOT MISS - and it probably won't.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3104title: September 23, 2019 - Proper Use of the Back Shoulderdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:A common problem for players who smash a lot is to have trouble lifting the ball against heavy backspin when looping. A common problem for players who loop a lot is to follow their opening loop against backspin by loop-killing or smashing a blocked return off the end. The two problems are related, and have to do with the back shoulder – the right shoulder for a right-hander.Players who smash a lot often do not drop their back shoulder when looping against backspin (or don't drop it enough). This costs them lifting power when looping, and leads to an erratic loop against heavy backspin. (Often they over-compensate, dropping their arm too much, and so loop too softly or off the end.) Players who loop a lot, after looping against backspin, will often automatically drop their back shoulder for the next shot as well. This causes them to lift slightly when loop-killing or smashing against a blocked return, and so the put-away goes off the end.So remember this rule: when looping against backspin, drop that shoulder; when loop-killing or smashing the blocked return, keep that shoulder up!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3102title: September 16, 2019 - Topspin Defensedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Look through almost any table tennis instructional book or video, go to almost any table tennis camp, and you'll hardly ever see or learn anything about topspin defense. (Also known as "fishing.") It seems to fall through the cracks for most coaches - it's not quite lobbing, but it's not your basic forehand or backhand drive or loop either. As a result, it is often shunted aside and ignored. But watch any tape of the best players in the world and you'll see topspin defense over and over.What exactly is topspin defense? It's a halfway shot, half lob, half loop or drive. It is done from off the table, against either a smash or a loop kill. The ball crosses the net perhaps one to three feet high, sometimes higher or lower. It should have at least some topspin, and sometimes sidespin as well. The ball should land deep on the table, and bounce outward due to the topspin. It should be done against an aggressive drive, loop, or smash.Topspin defense is easier and more effective with inverted rubber, but it can be done with other surfaces as well, but with less spin.Although lobbing is a type of topspin defense, topspin defense is generally more effective if the ball is kept lower. This way the opponent has less clearance for smashing, with the ball bouncing mostly outwards instead of up. How does one execute topspin defense?Start off from as far from the table as necessary to react to the opponent's attack. As the ball approaches, start with racket just below the ball, and use a mostly forward, slightly upward stroke. Contact the ball on the back and just "fish" it back. If you have a good loop, just think of it as a soft loop. If you are a good counterdriver, think of it as a counterdrive with a little extra topspin. Try to keep the ball deep, relatively low, and with some topspin.Depth is key. If your shot lands short on the table, the opponent will be able to cream the ball at wide angles, often right off the bounce. But if you keep the ball deep, it's low percentage for him to do that, and since you have more time to react against a weaker ball that's not wide angled, you can get a lot of balls back. Make sure to move the opponent around to increase the chances of a mistake - either missing or a weaker attack.However, the goal of topspin defense isn't just to wait for the opponent to miss - it's also to find a ball that you can counter-attack, usually from your stronger side, which for most is the forehand. (The body is less in the way on that side, so it's easier to counter-attack.) It's sometimes good to fish into the wide forehand, so the opponent might attack into your forehand.To fully appreciate topspin defense, you have to see it in action. Watch a video of some of the best players. The rallies are spectacular!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3099title: September 9, 2019 - Smashing Lobsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Smashing a lob is more difficult than it looks. There are several reasons for this. The height of a lob makes the ball bounce upwards, something you aren't used to hitting. If it bounces higher than your head, hitting it can be awkward. When it hits the table, it jumps quickly (usually with topspin and often sidespin), making it difficult to hit unless you wait on it. But if you wait on it, it will bounce away from the table, so that you may have to hit it from well off the table, a long way from your target. And if it has spin, it can force you into additional errors. So what should you do?When you see a lob coming, the first thing to do is to read the spin. If it has topspin, it will jump at you from the table, so don't get too close. If it has sidespin, it will jump sideways, so move to that side. You should also read the depth, and back up some for a deep one.You should hit a lob above eye level, either as it goes up or as it comes down. If you are tall, this gives you an advantage. You should practice smashing lobs as they drop until you are consistent. If a lob lands short, you should take it on the rise. This way, you can get such a good angle on the ball that it will be impossible for your opponent to cover both sides.Many players make the mistake of going for an outright winner even off the best lobs. It is low percentage to try to smash a good lob for a winner against a good lobber. Instead, keep smashing hard, but place the ball, usually to the backhand where most players have difficulty counter-attacking. What you want to do is to force a weak lob, one that lands short, and perhaps with less spin, and put that one away. Often a smash to the middle will force a weak lob. But be careful, you don't want to let your opponent counter-hit, so usually avoid his forehand side, until you go for a winner.There are several advanced techniques for smashing a lob. It is a good idea against all lobs (for righties) to raise the right shoulder. This gives you a better angle on the ball. A good way to do this is to start with your weight on your right foot, then, as you transfer your weight forward, lift your right leg off the ground, raising your right shoulder in the process. Make sure you put your weight into all smashes.Another way of smashing a lob is to jump in the air, so as to contact the ball high in the air. Although this can make you look foolish if you make a mistake, and is considered a poor method by many - yet some do this pretty well. To do it, you back up from the table, take short running start, and jump in the air, sideways to the table, with your right leg leaving the ground first. As you smash the ball, you do a scissors kick – that is, your right leg goes backwards, your left leg goes forward. This helps you thrust into the shot. By jumping into the air, you get a better angle on the ball, and contact the ball closer to the table, but it may hurt your timing. At the very least, this is a spectacular way to smash in an exhibition!Many advanced players like to smash lobs right off the bounce, sometimes even against deep balls. This takes great timing, but once perfected, your smash becomes almost unreturnable. But it's easy to miss-time the ball, so it's usually better to take off the bounce only against a short lob.You should generally avoid drop shots off lobs unless you think it will be an outright winner. If your opponent gets to it, you've let him back into the point. Since it is hard to drop shot a deep lob effectively and a short ball is easy to put away, a drop shot is usually a low percentage shot. However, against a very good lobber who gets into a rhythm and gets ball after ball back, a drop shot is a good change of pace to bring him in, allowing you to attack the next ball when he's too close to the table.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3096title: September 2, 2019 - Relaxing the Armdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the most common problems coaches face when coaching beginning and intermediate players is getting them to relax their arm when stroking. This writer has not only faced this problem hundreds of times as a coach but has also faced it as a lifetime weakness in his own playing game.If the muscles in the playing arm (or any other muscle) are tight, then they will not stroke properly. The tight muscles (both the ones you are using and the opposing muscles for the opposite movement) will fight you as you stroke, costing both power and control. Instead, try to keep your arm loose--like a rubber band.Some players can relax their muscles at will. But many think their arm is relaxed, but it's not as relaxed as it should be. If your arm isn't relaxed, then you are at a disadvantage when you play. How can you cure this problem?To get the arm warm and loose, take a long warm-up, or perhaps shadow-stroke. Then, as you set up to receive at the start of a point, relax both arms. Let them drop by your side loosely. Take a deep breath, and make sure your jaws and shoulders are relaxed. (If you are tense, these are the most likely spots to tighten up. If they tighten up, the rest of you probably will.) Then, as the point is about to start, bring your arms up as lightly as possible. You can do the same thing on your serve - relax your arms at your side, and then bring them up when you are ready to serve.If you absolutely cannot relax the arm on your own, it's time to take drastic action. Tense the arm muscles tightly for about five seconds. Then relax. This should help relax the muscles.A good test as to whether your arm is loose or tight is to imagine someone grabbing your arm as you stroke. They should have no problem in pulling your arm up or down. If you resist, then your arm muscles are too tight.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3094title: August 26, 2019 - Don't Get Mad; Get Determineddate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Some players get very upset with themselves when they lose a match that they think they could have won. Some don't show it or have a frozen smile, but are just as upset or disappointed on the inside, they are just trying to be a good sport about it - but they may be just as unhappy with the result as the one who shows emotions. There's nothing really wrong with such disappointment; true champions, and future champions, hate to lose.But how many really do something about it?Instead of getting mad, get determined. Immediately after the match, sit down with a pad of paper or other recording device, and analyze why you lost. What techniques do you need to improve to win next time? Do this while it is fresh on your mind. If you are thinking, "I could have won except for . . ." that's great - that's the first step in analyzing it. Perhaps discuss the match with someone who watched it, or even the opponent.But thendo something about it. Isolate what you need to work on, and do drills that specifically address the problem. Then more game-like ones until whatever technique you had trouble with is no longer a problem.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3092title: August 19, 2019 - Strategic Tacticsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Tactical thinking is what you do to win now; Strategic Thinking is what you do to develop your game in the long run. You need both; here are two articles on this:Strategic Versus Tactical ThinkingThe Balance Between Tactical and Strategic ThinkingBut there is also what I call Strategic Tactics. What are they? Suppose, in the first point of a match, you push the opponent's serve back, he loops slow and super-spinny, and you block off. You could think, "That's spinny! I better avoid it." And so, tactically, you decide you have to attack his serve or push short over and over, even when you aren't comfortable doing so - which puts you in a weaker tactical situation, since you are afraid to push long, even when the situation calls for it. Instead, perhaps intentionally push long on the second point, so that you can adjust to his spinny loop. If you do this, then you can get used to his spinny loop - and then you can go back to avoiding it when you can (attacking serve or pushing it short), while still having the option of pushing long when you need to. (Here'sHow to Punish those Slow, Spinny Loops.)There are many examples of this. If your opponent has a surface you aren't very good at, or a very flat backhand, or very heavy push, rather than avoid it, play into these shots at first so that you get comfortable against them, and then go back to more tactical play.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3090title: August 12, 2019 - Serving Shortdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the most fundamental rules of serving is that you have to be able to serve short. A deep serve may be effective against some players, and up to a certain level, it may always be, but if you cannot serve short, you will always be handicapped against most good players.A short serve is a serve that, if allowed, would bounce twice on the far side of the table. Because of this, a short serve cannot be looped like a deep serve because the table is in the way. This forces the receiver to reach over the table to return the serve, which can be awkward, especially on the forehand side.There are many types of short serves, with advantages and disadvantages to each. You can serve very short so that the ball bounces very close to the net. You can serve short so that its second bounce would be near the end-line, which is usually the best option. You can serve sidespin, spinning either right or left, combined with topspin or backspin, or else a pure topspin or backspin serve. You can fake spin but instead serve no-spin. You can serve to the wide angles, to the middle, or anywhere in between. There are endless varieties and you should be able to use most of them.To serve short takes good touch. Get a bucket of balls and practice alone on a table. If you point the table into a corner, the balls will mostly stay in one spot, so you can practice without long breaks to collect the balls. Practice this until you can control the ball's spin, bounce, and placement.Start off by serving backspin by brushing the BOTTOM of the ball with an open racket. Try to make the ball barely clear the net. It should bounce close to the net both on your side and your opponent's side. If you do it softly enough, it should bounce several times on the other side; it might even bounce backwards. Contact the ball just above the table level so that it will bounce lower. (Later you will want to be more aggressive with this serve, so that the second bounce is near the opponent's end-line.)As you learn to control the short backspin serve, try putting sidespin on it by brushing the ball from side to side. Experiment until it feels right. Then practice it until you can do it consistently.When you can do a short sidespin backspin serve, you're ready to try a short topspin serve. This time contact the ball with your racket going diagonally sideways and up. This action will make the ball pop up and go deep at first, but practice will give you control. Remember to keep the ball low to the net (on ALL serves). Experiment until feels right. Practice until you can put maximum spin on all types of serves and still keep them low and short. (Or fake spin but give no-spin - do this by contacting the ball near the handle, where the racket isn't moving much. You maximize spin by contacting near the tip.)Generally, all short serves can be classified as either backspin, side-top, or no-spin. You can treat a sidespin-backspin serve as if it were a backspin since both can be pushed - you just have to aim a little to the side against the sidespin-backspin one. A pure sidespin can be treated as a topspin once you get used to it, so unless the serve has backspin, it can be considered a side-top or no-spin serve.The advantage of the short backspin serve is that it is tricky to attack. The disadvantage is that it can be pushed back heavy or short and is easier to return safely. The advantage of a short side-top serve is that it can be awkward returning it, especially on the forehand, and many times is pushed off the end or popped up. The disadvantage is that it is easier to attack than a short backspin serve. But even if it is attacked, the return of a short side-top serve is easier to deal with because you know in advance the return will almost always be deep. A major advantage of a no-spin serve is that the opponent can't use your spin against you, so the receiver can't push or flip with as much spin. It's also tricky to drop short or keep low, compared to a backspin serve.You will have to decide which types of spins work best for you. For example, if you like to loop pushes, serve mostly backspin. You will find that certain spins work best against certain players. Another thing to keep in mind is that it is often harder to return a sidespin serve spinning away from you rather than one spinning towards you. For example, a righty's backhand serve is usually more effective to another righty's forehand, and a forehand pendulum serve is often more effective to the backhand.By serving wide to one side, you make your opponent reach over the table even more but you will also be providing him with the opportunity to hit an extreme angle against you. It is often best to serve to the middle and force the opponent to move both sideways and in, while also taking away the extreme angle. Again, this depends on the opponent as well as your own game.A short serve can be effective even if done over and over as long as you vary the spin. However, a short serve is most effective when used in conjunction with deep serves, so the receiver has more things to worry about.Finally, you should watch the good players whenever possible and copy their serves. Don't be afraid to ask questions – most players are glad to give you a lecture on their favorite serve. Best of all, work with a coach who can really help you with your serves.Placement is extremely important. For example, very short serve can be awkward to receive for some, and draws him over the table, leaving him vulnerable to a deep return. But it can be returned at an extreme angle. See what gives your opponent the most trouble, both placement, depth, and spin.Most importantly though, get out that bucket of balls and practice!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3088title: August 5, 2019 - Serving Longdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Serving deep has one major advantage and one major disadvantage. The advantage is that it forces an opponent to contact the ball as far from his/her target (your side of the table) as possible. The disadvantage is that it allows an opponent to attack more readily, especially with a loop drive. (Note – a short serve is a serve that, if given the chance, would bounce twice on the opponent's side of the table. Next week's Tip will be Serving Short.)Before deciding whether to serve long or short, know the advantages of each, and match them up with both you and your opponent's strengths and weaknesses. For example, if you opponent does not attack deep serves well, and you are a strong counter-driver, you might want to serve deep topspin.Here are four types of deep serves that are effective.Fast and FlatA fast and flat serve is most effective served into an opponent's backhand. By having no spin, it "dies" when it contacts the opponent's racket, and goes into the net. Even when this serve is read properly, most players are forced to take the serve late and lift it, often setting the server up for an easy attack.Make the ball hit your side of the table as close to the endline as possible, and hit the opponent's side as deep as possible. This allows you to serve with maximum speed. It is especially important to serve this ball as deep as possible so opponent is forced to back up. Making the serve as fast and deep as possible, the opponent will have little time to make a backswing, which will make an effective return very difficult.All serves bounce on the table twice before the opponent contacts it. Each time the ball hits the table, it picks up some topspin. If this is not taken into account, a fast and flat serve will have some topspin, and the ball won't "die" off the opponent's racket. To counteract this, stroke slightly downward at contact, putting very slight backspin on the ball.Deep and SpinnyDeep spin serves are among the trickiest of serves to return. The receiver not only has to read the spin but is aiming for a target farther away than for a shorter serve.A deep spin serve is slower than a fast and flat serve, so an opponent has more time to attack. You have to judge whether the serve is effective against a specific opponent.If your spin serve breaks a lot, you might want its first bounce (on your side of the table) to be midway between the endline and the net. That way the opponent doesn't see the break for as long as possible, plus it gives a bigger angle into the receiver's backhand as it breaks sideways. You want it to land deep on the opponent's side so his/her target (your side of the table) is as far away as possible.Fast Down-the-LineIf you serve deep into an opponent's backhand, but he/she steps around and attacks it with a forehand, you might want to try a fast down-the-line serve. Most players who step around move too soon, so you can often get an "ace" or at a service winner. At the least, the opponent will hesitate about stepping around on the next serve.Just off the EndHere an opponent has to decide both what type of spin is on the ball and whether the ball will go deep or not. If given the chance, the ball's second bounce (on opponent's side) would be around the edge or just off the end. This serve combines some of the advantages of a short serve and a deep spin serve. It's called a "half-long" serve.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3086title: July 29, 2019 - Do You Want to Know an Opponent's Rating Before a Match?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you know your opponent's rating before a match, you have several advantages:You can use tactics and techniques that will generally defeat that level;If the opponent is lower rated, you can go in with confidence;If the opponent is higher rated, you can go in feeling you have nothing to lose, and so play better than normal.On the other hand:The opponent's rating might be inaccurate, and so the advantages mentioned above can all backfire;If the opponent is lower rated, you may feel pressure because of a possible upset, or just play down to that level, and lose;If the opponent is higher rated, you may feel intimidated, and so not play well.I would say that far more players have lost matches because of the latter reasons than players who won for the former reasons. In fact, it's not even close. For most players, it's best to approach each match with your own game plan, and worry about the opponent's playing style, not his rating. If you execute properly, you'll beat most of the "weaker" players, and probably lose to most of the "stronger" players. But this is better than pulling off an occasional win by knowing the opponent's rating, and losing five for the same reason.In most tournaments, an opponent's rating is usually listed on the draw sheet and match slip, and so you usually will know his rating; you'd have to make an extra effort to avoid seeing it. And, of course, you might simply know the player and his rough rating from the past. So what do you do?Simply put it out of your mind. To reiterate, the opponent's playing style is what is important, not his rating. (Note that playing style includes his level at the various techniques. A rating doesn't give you that info.)There are some players who do like to know the opponent's rating in advance, for the very reasons given above. As long as you are flexible in your thinking and tactics in the middle of a match situation - and most players are not - that's fine. It's usually better to figure out the opponent's level of play in the match itself, not hope his level matches the number next to his name.Also, an opponent's overall level isn't nearly as important as what the opponent's level is for each technique. If his rating or level is 2000, but he loops like a 2200 player and blocks like an 1800 player, then your goal isn't to beat a 2000-level player; it's to avoid the 2200 looper, while going after the 1800 blocker.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3084title: July 8, 2019 - Take the Shotdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players hesitate in taking an aggressive shot because they are afraid of missing. On the contrary, if you are afraid of taking a specific shot, then (unless it's a championship match), any good coach will tell youthat's a reason to take that shot,so you'll learn to do it under pressure - and especially when you need it when youdohave a championship match.The more you go for the right aggressive shot under pressure the better you'll get at it. In fact, an experienced player will be nervous aboutnottaking the right shot, since he knows he's not playing the percentages, and so is literally playing to lose. This doesn't mean killing every ball; it means learning what the high-percentage shot is, and taking that shot whenever it comes up, regardless of the score. A great example of this is looping or otherwise attacking a deep serve. If you are afraid to do this in practice, then how will you do it when you really need the shot?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3082title: June 24, 2019 - Learning to Windate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the most common problems players face in their table tennis is the inability to recognize the difference between learning the shots, and learning to win. There's a big difference.Many players have a good idea of what to do out at the table - but just don't have the strokes. This article is not directed toward these players, who generally know who they are. These players need to see a coach to fix up their strokes, and will improve as fast as their strokes develop.An equal number of players have good strokes, but don't know how to put them together to win matches. Players like this can spend years perfecting shots, but never improve as fast as they should - and often quit the game in disgust as others pass them in rating or ranking. This article is directed toward these players.To get the maximum out of whatever shots you have, you have to combine the shots in various combinations. For example, a player with a great loop against backspin won't get the most out of his game if he constantly serves topspin. Similarly, a player who counter-drives well may not get the most out of his game if he mostly serves backspin. This is tactical thinking.And yet a player who is weak at one area of his game should often play to use that weakness in practice matches to make it stronger - and develop a more powerful game. This is strategic thinking.It goes beyond just serve and receive, of course. A player with a good loop kill may regularly go for a winner on the first shot in the rally, and although he may get away with it sometimes, he'd do far better if he set himself up better with other shots. He may end up winning by ripping every shot - but he'd be even a better player if he learned to pick his shots.How does one learn to win? There are two main variables in this:I. DEVELOPING THE RIGHT SHOTSMany players develop their games with no real thought behind it. As mentioned previously, it doesn't make sense for a player who loops backspin well to constantly serve topspin. (Unless, of course, this player is trying to strategically improve that part of his game.) Instead, a player such as this should develop the shots that set up his loop against backspin - a short backspin or no-spin serve, perhaps a short push to force a pushed return. Similarly, you should develop your game to favor the shots you do well.Take the time to think out what type of game you best play:1. Strengthen Your StrengthsWhat type of rallies are you best at?What shots and techniques should you develop to get yourself into that type of rally?What shots and techniques should you develop to become even stronger in that type of rally?2. Strengthen Your WeaknessesWhat types of rallies are you weak at?What shots and techniques can you develop that will strengthen yourself in the rallies that you are weak at?What shots and techniques can you develop that will keep you out of the rallies that you are weak at?II. KNOWING HOW TO USE THOSE SHOTSTable tennis is very similar to chess. A top chess player can spot a weaker player a few pieces, perhaps even the queen, and still win because he knows how to use the pieces better. Similarly, a table tennis player will often win against a player with better shots if he knows how to use the shots he does have more effectively.How many times have you heard someone say, "I could have won except for..." Shouldn't that player learn to handle or avoid that one "except for" shot?BACK TO LEARNING TO WINHow does one take what has been given above and apply it to match situations?If you only play against stronger players, you will most often be forced to react to your opponent's shot, rather than forcing your shots and combinations on your opponent. On the other hand, if you play players who are weaker, you will force your game on your opponent - and instead of reacting to your opponent's shots, you will be practicing your own combinations.Players who rarely have the opportunity to play stronger players are handicapped in their development. But so too are players who only play players who are stronger. To reach your maximum potential, you need both. A player with a rating, say, 100 points lower than yours is perfect for developing your own combinations.So, develop the shots you need to win and learn how to use those shots. Develop your shots by playing stronger players when you can. But stop avoiding those weaker players. Turn them into practice fodder, rather than be fodder yourself.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3080title: June 17, 2019 - Six-Step Training Progressiondate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Developing your table tennis game is a steady progression from the simple to the more complex. Many players, however, get stuck at the beginning or intermediate stage, and never move on toward developing the more advanced parts of their game. It's a common syndrome--players spending year after year trying to completely perfect their most basic shots, and refusing to learn anything more advanced until the basic shots are (in their mind) perfected--and so they never improve as fast as they should. It's sort of like a sprinter spending all his time trying to perfect his walk while his rivals are practicing sprinting. Decide for yourself where you fit in the following six steps, and work your way toward the final step. It's not an exact thing--even when you are doing drills from Step Six, you should still be doing some of the drills from all five earlier steps.Although most of the drills given below are simple rallying-type drills, as you get more advanced, you should begin many drills with serve & receive techniques to simulate game situations. For example, rather than have your partner serve a simple topspin serve to start a drill, have him serve deep backspin, you loop, partner blocks, and the drill continues. Or partner serves short, you flip the short ball, and continue the drill. Or partner serves backspin, you push, partner attacks, you counter-attack, and the drill continues.In all drills below, whenever your forehand or backhand is mentioned, that means either a drive or a loop – you decide. If you're a beginner, mostly drive. As your loop becomes more advanced, use the loop more often. However, make sure you can do each drill competently with a drive before doing it with a loop. I'd recommend using your forehand loop in as many of the drills as possible as soon as possible. Depending on your style and level of play, you may also use the backhand loop in many of the drills. (Drills are written as if there were two righties; lefties should adjust.)Step One: Stroke & Stroke Before you can run, you have to learn to walk. In table tennis, that means you have to learn the strokes before you can use them in more advanced drills. In practice, this means:Forehand to Forehand Cross-CourtBackhand to Backhand Cross-CourtForehand to Backhand Down-the-LineA common mistake is to over-practice the strokes by doing simple forehand to forehand, backhand to backhand, etc., over and over, session after session, sometimes for years. You have to start out this way, but don't spend too much time each session on this. Once you can hit 20 in a row with good form, you can start doing drills from Step 2. However, you do need to make the strokes automatic--which means you should start most sessions with the basic forehand to forehand or backhand to backhand for 5-10 minutes until you can consistently get 20-100 in row. As the shots become more instinctive, spend less and less time doing forehand to forehand, etc. Think of this as a simple warm-up, and do no more than 2-5 minutes each session as you warm up each shot. Use the more advanced drills to fully warm up your shots.Step Two: Move & Stroke Now it's time to add footwork to your strokes. You have to learn to move to the ball.One-One Footwork. Partner alternates hitting one ball to your wide forehand, one ball to your middle forehand. You move back and forth, hitting all forehands and returning each ball to the same spot for your opponent, either his backhand or forehand.One-One Forehand Footwork from Backhand Corner. Partner alternates hitting one ball to your backhand, one ball to the middle of the table. You return each with your forehand, moving side to sideOne-One Backhand Footwork. Partner alternates hitting one ball to your wide backhand, one to your middle backhand. You move side to side, returning each ball with your backhand.Step Three: Different Strokes Now it's time to combine your forehand and backhand strokes. Here are some drills you can do:Forehand-Backhand Alternating. Partner alternates hitting one ball to your backhand, one to your forehand. You alternate hitting backhand and forehand, returning each ball to the same spot (either partner's forehand or backhand).Two-One Drill (Falkenberg Drill). Partner hits two balls to your backhand, one ball to your forehand, then repeats sequence. You return the first ball with your backhand, step around your backhand corner and return the second ball with your forehand, then move to your wide forehand and return the third ball with your forehand.Cross-Court/Down-the-Line. Partner hits every ball down-the-line, while you hit every ball cross-court. Ball will travel in a figure eight. Next, you hit down the line, partner hits cross-court.Step Four: Choose & Stroke Now it's time to add some randomness to your drills. This is the step that many players never get to as they spend eternity trying to develop the perfect forehand or backhand. The key thing in this step is to keep it a simple choice between only two possibilities. Here is the key drill:Random side-to-side. Partner hits ball either to middle forehand or middle backhand. You return with either forehand or backhand, depending on where ball is going. Keep the footwork and stroking practice here to a minimum--the key thing to work on here is making the choice between forehand and backhand, and smoothly executing the stoke. Try not to anticipate; just react. You shouldn't be moving in one direction, and then have to change directions. Make sure your first move is in the correct move.Step Five: Choose & Move Now it's time to combine decision-making, stroking and footwork. Don't just use the drills given below--make up your own! There are an infinite number of potential drills.Random Forehands. Partner hits the ball randomly all over your forehand side. You move to each ball and return with a forehand.Random Backhands. Partner hits the ball randomly all over your backhand side. You move to each ball and return with a backhand.Backhand-Random Forehand. Partner hits one ball to wide backhand, one ball to either middle of table or wide forehand. You alternate hitting backhand from backhand corner, and forehand either from middle or wide forehand, depending on where your partner hits the ball.Random Deep Serves. Partner serves either deep to your forehand or deep to your backhand. Depending on your playing style and foot speed, you can attack either with forehand or backhand, and continue with any drill sequence, or attack all serves with forehand, and continue with any drill sequence.Alternate Two-One. Same as the Two-One (Falkenburg) given in Step 3, except after hitting the second ball to backhand, partner has option of either hitting to wide forehand (as in normal two-one) or hitting third ball to your backhand, and then going to your wide forehand. If partner hits third ball to your backhand, you return with your backhand--smoothly, without starting to move to your wide forehand.Step Six: Whole Table Now it's time to pull out all the stops and most of the rules and play almost like you were in a match.Whole Table Random. Partner hits balls to all parts of table, randomly. You return with forehand or backhand.Serve & Attack. You serve backspin, partner pushes anywhere on table. You attack (mostly by looping), either with all forehand, or with forehand or backhand, depending on your playing style and footspeed.And now you can do Step Seven, the ultimate random: Matches!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3078title: June 10, 2019 - Should You Play Differently at Deuce?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The simple answer is Yes and No. Yes, as in there's no point any longer on holding back on anything tactically. If you have a tactic, serve, or other shot that the opponent has trouble with, which you've been using sparingly so he wouldn't get used to it, now's the time to use it. Some figure the opponent is expecting it, and so hold back on their best tactic - this rarely ends well, and usually leaves the opponent and viewers wondering, "Why didn't he do that thing that gave his opponent so much trouble?"No, as in the score doesn't affect the tactics, except that you no longer are holding back. Some believe that at deuce, you should "play safe." That's only true if you are a nervous wreck and can't do your more aggressive shots - in which case you need a trip to a sports psychologist. Of course, if your opponent is a nervous wreck, that might change tactically what you want to do. It works both ways. Under pressure it's usually easier to make an opening shot, where you choose the shot you are doing, than it is to react to an opponent's shot, where there's more uncertainty. So if the high-percentage shot is to attack, then you should attack, even if you are nervous - and the more you do this, the better you become at doing it under pressure.The simplest way of looking at all this is that the highest percentage tactic at any time is whatever the highest percentage tactic is, regardless of the score.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3076title: June 3, 2019 - What to Think About Between Points . . . and What NOT to Think Aboutdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:This is a simple one. Between points, your only thoughts should be tactical. Don't think or worry about the score, about how important the match or the next point is, about nets and edges, or anything else except tactics. The very act of thinking about your next tactic should clear your mind of other thoughts, so it's a double-whammy. Keep the tactics simple, and once you decide on a tactic, clear your mind and let your training take over.But tactics can have a broad definition and can overlap with sports psychology. If you are losing confidence, the tactical thing to do might be to tell yourself, "You can do it!" or the equivalent. If you are losing focus, the tactical thing to do might be to stare at something in the distance for a moment to clear your mind and regain focus. Everybody is different in this way. During my playing years I mostly attacked with my forehand, and so had to move a lot - so between points I was always telling myself, "Push yourself!", which was my way of saying "Move!" - which was my way maximizing my movement so I could, tactically, get my forehand into play.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3071title: May 27, 2019 - Why You Should Develop a Backhand Loopdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players never develop a backhand loop. Some rely on the forehand loop, and so mostly push on the backhand, with the idea of pushing back wide to the backhand to take away the opponent's forehand loop. Or the player may instead develop a backhand drive (i.e. more of a hit, less topspin) to attack backspin with their backhand.But doing this puts you at a tactical disadvantage. A good backhand loop gives you the option of pushing or attacking. If you attack, a backhand loop gives more consistency than a hit (because of the extra topspin pulling it down), and the topspin itself makes it even more effective as the opponent struggles to react to it. If you can only attack effectively with the forehand, then tactically, an opponent can just push wide to your backhand, taking away your attack unless you have very fast footwork - and if you do step around and forehand loop it, he has you out of position if he blocks quickly to the forehand. A backhand loop is especially useful at the start of a rally when your opponent pushes to your wide backhand, such as when he either pushes your serve back or serve and pushes.So develop a consistent backhand loop. Suddenly, you have the tactical advantage. It's not just that you can attack first, but you also get to choosewhereto attack. You could go crosscourt to the opponent's waiting backhand block, but even more effectively, take it deep to the middle (the midpoint between the opponent's forehand and backhand, around the elbow), or down the line to the forehand. (Same idea when playing against a lefty, or vice versa.) With a good backhand loop, you are in control; suddenly, the opponent is forced to either attack balls he isn't comfortable attacking, or giving you the attack, where you dictate where you attack, while all he can do is try to react. It also gives you a variation from your forehand loop - your opponent has to adjust to both loops, which come out differently.So get a coach or top player to help you with the shot, watch videos top players, and do some multiball practice. A two-winged attack gives you twice the weapons in your tactical toolbox and turns you into a far more feared player.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3069title: May 20, 2019 - Recipe for Table Tennis Successdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Who knew that cooks could be so good at table tennis! With a little tongue in cheek, and yet the touch of truth, here are fifteen ingredients to table tennis success.Put in lots of practice thyme.Always turnip on time for practice.Lettuce be thankful for all the hard practice you've put in.Have peas of mind while you play.Be cool as a cucumber.Don't grape about problems.Squash any thoughts about losing or the score.Focus on the pear of serves coming up.Pepper your opponent with tricky serves.Banana flip those short balls.Use good tactics to put a steak in your opponent's heart.Focus on your own playing style, telling yourself, "I yam what I yam."The path to tea tea success is a rocky road, but you can persevere.Don't be a hot dog when you win or crabby when you lose.When your game goes to lemons, make lemonade.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3067title: May 13, 2019 - First Block and First Counterloopdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Do you often have trouble blocking or counterlooping against your opponent's opening loop against backspin? If you are like most players, of course you do - and there's a simple reason for it. Most players practice blocking and counterlooping in rallies where they start the rally by serving topspin. And so they are conditioned to block and counterloop against loops against topspin.But a loop against backspin has a different trajectory (starting closer to the table, so more arc) and more topspin (since it adds to the incoming backspin), and so you need to practice against that. In fact, if you mostly practice against loops in topspin-topspin rallies, you are conditioning yourself to react correctly in such rallies - but since that's likely how you'll react in a game when the opponent loops against backspin, you are also conditioning yourself tomissagainst that!Get a partner and a bucket of balls. Server serves backspin, receiver pushes back long, server loops, receiver blocks or counterloops - but don't play out the point. As soon as the server loops, he should be reaching for the next ball. One player gets to practice his loop against backspin, over and over, while the other practices reacting to a loop against backspin, over and over. This is how you isolate individual shots and techniques to develop them. It's a version of multiball that far too few players use.So, next time you have trouble dealing with an opponent's loop against backspin, are you going to do the above, or are you going to just practice against loops against topspin?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3065title: May 6, 2019 - Playing Against Short Pips on the Forehanddate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Now that Sweden's Mattias Falck made it to the final of Men's Singles at the Worlds using short pips on the forehand, there's going to be a sudden increase in players playing this way. I think that's a very good thing - I miss the days where there were far more contrasts in style, compared to the more modern game where most play almost the same, with more subtle differences. So how do you play a player with short pips on the forehand, inverted on the backhand? Here are some tips.Short, very low no-spin serves to the forehand. Pips-out players are notoriously good attacking short, spinny balls, but have trouble with no-spin that's very low. It also draws them over the table, leaving them jammed and out of position on the backhand.Long, low, heavy pushes, especially to the wide corners. A pips-out loop doesn't create as much spin as an inverted surface. Counter-attack against these weaker opening loops. If they smash your push, then work on your push.Deep backspin serves to the forehand. This is almost a forgotten tactic from the past, but just like a deep push to the corner, a pips-out player can't attack a low, deep backspin ball as well as an inverted player. Counter-attack their opening shot, often to the wide backhand, since they've been drawn out of position to the wide forehand. Or, if they rush back to cover the wide backhand, go right back to the wide forehand.Attack the middle. Pips-out players have to stay close to the table to be effective, so they are already rushed. They also have to stroke the ball more than an inverted player since short-pips isn't as lively as inverted. If you attack their middle (the mid-point between their forehand and backhand, usually the elbow), they are rushed even more and have little time to stroke the ball effectively.Aggressive loops deep to the forehand and middle. A pips-out forehand is great for smashing loops, but against an aggressive loop that goes deep, they have difficulty since they can't smash that consistently. Move the ball around from wide forehand to the middle so they have to move as well.In rallies, keep the ball deep. This both makes it harder for the pips-out player to smash, and gives you more time to react to their pips-out shots.Before the match, practice against short pips.Play with short pips. One of the best ways to understand the weaknesses and strengths of a style is to try it out yourself.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3062title: April 29, 2019 - Rope-a-Dope Defensedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Suppose you are playing a relentless counter-hitter, who plays every really bang-bang, and you are struggling to stay in these rallies. Point after point ends with either you missing or making a weak return the opponent smashes. How do you get out of this?There are three main ways. First, attack first and try to end the point before you get into these bang-bang rallies. Second, force the opponent to open weakly by giving them low, heavy, deep pushes, or deep serves that they have trouble attacking, and counter-attacking off their openings, with placement key (to wide angles or to opponent's mid-point between forehand and backhand, usually the elbow).But once you are in these rallies, what should you do? Rather than mindlessly rally and hope your opponent makes a mistake, focus on three things that will turn hopeless play into rope-a-dope defense:Get every ball back. This may sound basic, but if you make that your focus, you might surprise yourself with how many shots you get back. After a shot or two into such rallies you might have to take a half step back to give yourself enough time to react to shots, but don't back up too much or you give the opponent wider angles and more time to attack your shots. Most likely cover most middle shots with your backhand. A key thing here is confidence - if you truly believe you can rally with the opponent, then you may surprise yourself at how well you do so. A lack of confidence leads to tentativeness, which leads to both weak shots and misses. With that confidence, you might even find yourself hitting in winners when you get the right shot!Keep it deep. As long as your shots are deep, the opponent can't rush or angle you too much. It's those returns that go short that'll get you into trouble. If your shots are going short, hit your shots just a little more aggressively to get them deeper. Find the balance between consistency and aggressiveness, but keep the ball deep!Move the ball around. Don't make things easy for the opponent. Ideally, keep every ball not just deep, but to wide angles, or when you see a chance, an aggressive counter-shot at the elbow, which not only gives the opponent trouble, but also pulls him out of position and opens up one of the corners. An aggressive counter-shot to the forehand often takes an opponent out of position as well, opening up either the wide backhand, or often the wide forehand again as players often over-recover after the first one to the forehand. Beware - if you hit a wide-angled shot, it gives the opponent the chance to angle back, and so you have to recover into a ready position to cover that angle!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3060title: April 22, 2019 - No More Excuses - Develop World-Class Serves with TNTdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Unlike most other advanced techniques, you don't have to be athletic or play at a high level to develop great serves. Anybody - yes, that means you - can develop great, even world-class serves. They just need a little TNT - Technique, Necessity, and Time.You have to have proper serving Technique. This means working with a coach or top player. Unlike most other techniques, serving is subtle and is tricky to learn by just watching. Half the point of serving is making it look like one thing while doing another, so unless you are an expert, you might not realize what's really happening. Here's my articleTen Steps to a Great Serving Game.You have to decide it's Necessary. Top players often develop top serves out of sheer necessity - if they don't, they won't become top players. So you have to ask yourself - how necessary is it for you to dominate against your peers by developing great serves? Better serves also means you play at a higher level, and so play higher-level competition, which pushes you to an even higher level.  They also lead to lots of balls to attack, which develops your attacking game, which improves your level even more. So . . . is developing great serves necessary? Remember -Anyone Can Be Very Good At Something- and (to reiterate the above), "If you develop one aspect of your game, other parts will follow. If you develop a very good serve, then you get lots of follow-up shots, and so you develop a very good attack."You have to put in the Time. That means practice, practice, and more practice. But it has to bemeaningfulpractice - if you just practice low-level serves, you'll end up with very polished low-level serves. Here's my articlePracticing Serves the Productive Way.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3058title: April 15, 2019 - The Lead Problemdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Have you ever played one of those matches where you played really well, went up 2-0 in games, and then stopped "playing to win" and instead "played to not lose," and so changed how you went up 2-0 in games to start with, and so lost the match? Or had a lead in the final game you needed to win, and also played to not lose, and so lost?Most likely, after winning that first game, you continued playing the same way as you were not on the verge of winning, and deep down, you realized you had a long way to go. And so you continued to play well in the second game, not just playing-wise, but tactically doing what it took to win. But after going up 2-0 or taking a lead in the final game you needed, you realized, deep down, that you were on the verge of winning - and that's when players let up by playing to not lose, and so lose.The key is to make it a habit to NEVER change your mentality after playing well and winning a game. Whatever worked in that game is what you want. So make a conscious effort to enter the next game with that same mentality - which often means blanking out your mind and just letting yourself go, where the only thoughts in your mind are those two or three tactical things are working, and what type of serve you should next use.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3056title: April 8, 2019 - Remember Your Best Matchdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:We all have good and bad matches - but this is NOT some random thing. Poor play usually comes from poor mental skills. But here's the amazing fact - EVERYBODY has great mental skills some of the time. The key is to make that most or all of the time. How do you do it?Think about a match where you played your best ever. It doesn't matter if it was a tournament, league, or practice match, and it doesn't even matter if you won or lost. What matters is you playedwell. Your mind was probably clear, you played points almost mindlessly, and everything seemed so easy, as if the ball was moving in slow motion - right? The mentality you had in that match is probably the mentality you always want - so remember how you felt in that match, and just repeat it, every time you play. (For me, it's always been my win over 2500+ Rey Domingo in 1990, where the ball literally seemed to be moving in slow motion and I felt like I could do anything - and in that match, and a few others, I could.)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3054title: April 1, 2019 - Positioning After Servedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the interesting things is to watch a player's ready position after the serve. Most do not position themselves well. Most go to the same position no matter their serve.Suppose you serve short to the middle of the table and then position yourself perfectly. If you have a strong forehand, for example, and want to follow as many serves with that shot as possible, you should (for a righty) stand as far to the left as you can while still being able to handle a shot to your forehand that's not super-aggressive. (If it's a super-aggressive return, then either your serve was poor or the receiver made a great and perhaps low-percentage return.)Now suppose you serve short to the backhand. Most players position themselves the same way. But now the receiver has no angle into your forehand, and so you should stand more to your left.Now suppose you serve short to the forehand. Now the receiver has an extreme angle into your forehand, and so you have to position yourself more to the right to cover it.If you are more of a two-winged player, or even favor the backhand, then you should do a similar analysis in developing your positioning after each serve.Now suppose you serve long. The same positioning logic applies here. However, now the opponent is likely to attack your serve. If you are expecting to block, then your positioning needs to be relatively close to the table. But if you are looking to counterloop, then perhaps you would want to position yourself half a step back, to give yourself time.Think these things over, and then, guess what? Go practice them! Go practice your serves, and then, at the end, practice your serve and positioning. Imagine different opponents as you do different serves, and go into the appropriate position. If the opponent flips very aggressively, then you have to cover the corners more. If the opponent mostly pushes, then you have more time, and so don't have to cover those corners as much. And so on. Then try out this positioning in real games, and see how much it helps!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3052title: March 25, 2019 - Advanced Sponge but No-So-Fast Bladesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most players at the beginning/intermediate level use blades that are too fast. This not only hurts their control, but it also develops bad habits where the player uses the speed of the racket to rebound the ball back instead of stroking it, leading to poor strokes that won't work very well at intermediate/advanced levels. It's also harder to create great spin with a faster blade, since the ball rebounds off so fast.What I generally recommend, for beginners to intermediate levels (up to about 1800-2000 range), is to get at most a medium speed blade until you are somewhat advanced. You do want one that's flexible enough to allow easy looping, and that feels right in your hand. Try out different ones until you find just the right one.However, along with the medium-speed blade, I recommend players go to advanced sponges relatively early. Why? First, it allows you to develop advanced shots, especially looping, much earlier and better in your development, which means you are way ahead of those who use less advanced sponges and so don't regularly do these advanced shots. Second, the ball comes off these surfaces differently, so it's best to get used to that as early in your development as possible. Players with advances sponges naturally loop (and counterloop) even in fast rallies, while those handicapped by a less-advanced sponge tend to block. You absolutely need to learn to block - extremely well if you want to be good! - but at the higher levels, looping is the most important shot - and, for most, the sooner you become a looper, the sooner you can become a top player.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3049title: March 18, 2019 - Challenge an Opponent's Strengthdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Sometimes it's a good tactic to go after an opponent's strength. After all, his game is probably based on getting that shot into play, and so you are probably going to have to face it - so rather than have the opponent choose when he'll use it, why don't you pick the times he'll use it?For example, suppose your opponent has a very nice forehand smash or loop. He's going to use the shot; there's no stopping that. You could play into his backhand, but then he could step around to use the forehand. So why not simply attack his forehand side yourself, and force him to use his strength off a difficult ball? And then, with him pushed over to his forehand side, you can block back to his backhand, where he has to play his weaker shot while out of position - a double whammy.Or suppose your opponent is a very good blocker. You keep getting stuck in rallies where he's quick-blocking the ball around the table, rushing you and forcing you into mistakes. Since he's going to block anyway, why not throw a slow, deep, spinny loop at him? That's the most difficult ball for a blocker to quick-block - he has no speed to play off, it's deep so he can't really rush you, and the spin makes it tricky to block. And so rather than getting quick-blocked all over the table, you'll get a weaker block that you can really attack.So if your opponent is going to use his strength, why not use it against him?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3047title: March 11, 2019 - How to Beat a MUCH Stronger Playerdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Let's start with a reality check: A much stronger player (MSP) is going to beat you if he plays his level. That's why he's an MSP. But everybody has "off" days, and if you want to maximize your chances of knocking off a MSP (other than simply improving your own game, in which case the opponent no longer is an MSP), then there are three things to focus on:Beat him tactically.Maximizing the chances of the MSP having an "off" day.Maximizing your chances of beating the MSP if he has an "off" day.How do you beat a MSP tactically? Simple - study his game so you know his strengths and weaknesses, relative to his level. Then develop tactics so that he has to beat you with his "B" game against your "A" game. Does he have a big forehand loop against backspin? Then perhaps serve short, heavy, low backspin to his forehand, and if he pushes it back, either attack or quick push to his backhand, making him attack with his "weaker" backhand. If he attacks the short serve, then you are making him beat you without his big forehand loop against backspin, his biggest strength. But don't forget to bring your own game into account - you want your "A" game against his "B" game.How do you maximize the chance of the MSP having an "off" day? First, see the first item above - if you beat him tactically, then he's more likely to have an "off" day. It's hard to be at your best if your opponent won't let you use your best shots! But the other major way is to use lots of variation so the MSP never gets into a rhythm. Mix up your serves, your receives, your pushes, your blocks, your loops, and everything else.How do you maximize your chance of beating an MSP if he has an "off" day? First, focus on the two items above - beating him tactically and varying your shots so the MSP never gets into a rhythm. But then you need to focus on one simple thing: You must play well yourself. That means staying relaxed and just letting yourself go, but without overplaying that just leads to mistakes. Don't think of the MSP as a "Much Stronger Player." He's just a big fish you've hooked, and so all you have to do is focus on reeling him in. I hesitate to say this, but the biggest cause of an MSP coming back and winning is when the MWP ("Much Weaker Player") realizes he's about to beat an MSP, and mentally falls apart. MSPs are generally very strong mentally - that's why they are MSPs - so you have to be just as strong mentally as they are.Why did I hesitate on saying this? Because the very act of thinking about beating an MSP in a match is the biggest cause of choking it away, and my mentioning it may make you think about it as well. But you need to prepare yourself in advance of the match against the MSP so that when you are in that position to win, you are mentally ready to play it all the way to the end without thinking about actually winning or losing. So just think of him as that fish you are reeling in, and keep reeling!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3045title: March 4, 2019 - Be an Olympian - In Your Minddate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you think of yourself as an Olympian when you play, you'll play better than if you think of yourself as some scrub at a club. But how can you psychologically pretend to be an Olympian, and how does that help? Great question - and here'sThe Twelve Core Psychological Characteristics of Olympiansfrom Psychology Today. I was going to write about each point, but why do that when they've already done it so well in the article?The key question to ask yourself is this: Do you have a better chance of playing really well if you imagine yourself as a player playing really well? Once you realize that the answer there is a decided YES, go through the twelve items below, one by one, and grade yourself on how you do on each. If you get a good grade on one, good for you! If you get a bad grade on one - you know what you have to do. Here are the twelve:The ability to cope with and control anxiety.ConfidenceMental toughnessSport intelligenceThe ability to focus and block out distractionsCompetitivenessHaving a hard-work ethicThe ability to set and achieve goalsCoachabilityHopefulnessOptimismPerfectionism===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3043title: February 25, 2019 - Top Ten Ways to Turn a Match Arounddate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The first four are psychological, the rest are tactical ideas.Remember the mentality and feel of a great match you've played, and get back into that mode.Take ten seconds to stare at something in the distance to clear your mind.With nothing to lose, relax, have fun, and just play.Ignore the score and just play the next point. Repeat.Attack elbow with backhand. Most players have trouble against an aggressive shot right at their playing elbow, and the easiest way to do that is with the backhand, where you are facing the opponent and so can see his elbow. Do it over and over in rallies and watch him crumble. (Exception - if you're playing an all-out forehand attacker, then go for the wide corners.)Short no-spin serve. They are harder to push heavy, low, or short, and tend to pop up. And if the serve is very low, they are surprisingly hard to attack effectively. So serve and attack! Mix them up with backspin serves.Slow, spinny, consistent loops. Missing your loop? Then slow it down and go for lots of topspin. You'll be surprised how many players fall apart against this.Quick-push serves back wide. Can't stop the opponent's serve and attack against your push return? Are you giving him easy pushes, or are you quick-pushing the serve quick off the bounce into a wide corner? To the backhand will likely disarm him, to the forehand will likely catch him off guard. (If you have good touch and have practiced this, you can also push them short.)Stop and think about how you are winning and losing points. Then pick a winning service pattern, and one or two other tactics that will win.Talk to a coach or top player between games or in a time-out. He might see something you have not. Or just talk to anyone between games, and you'll be amazed at how talking it out makes it obvious what you need to do.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3041title: February 18, 2019 - Judging the Depth of a Servedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the things coaches stress is that you should be aggressive against deep serves. (A short serve means that, given a chance, the ball would bounce twice on your side; a long serve would only bounce once.) Against a short serve, you can rush and angle the server by taking the ball quick off the bounce, plus you can drop the ball short. But against a deep serve, you can't do this, so a passive return gives the server an easy attack. If the server has a weak attack, that might be okay, but in most cases, if you don't attack deep serves, you put yourself at a disadvantage as the server gets an easy attack.But to attack the deep serves you first have to recognize that the serve is long. How do you do this?Imagine an outfielder in baseball running down a fly ball. (Or any other sport that involves judging the trajectory of a thrown or hit ball.) He doesn't do mathematical calculations to judge where the ball will drop. He simply watches the ball as it rises, and from that, with experience, he learns to judge the arc the ball will take. And so, after time, a good outfielder can immediately run to almost exactly where the ball will drop.It's the same thing in table tennis - not just in judging whether a serve is long, but on ANY shot. With experience, you learn to judge, as the ball is leaving the opponent's paddle, where it will go. (Advanced players take this to another level and often know where the ball is goingbeforecontact, by watching the ball and racket as they approach each other.) When an opponent serves, it's the same thing. Watch his paddle, and as the ball bounces off of it, you should be able, with practice, to almost instantly judge its trajectory. If you can do that, you'll immediately know if it's long or short.More specifically, you'll see how fast the ball comes off the paddle, how downward it travels (which lets you know high it will bounce, which is part of the trajectory), as well as the spin. (Topspin will make it bounce out at you, and so usually goes long, while backspin slows it down, and is more likely to pull the serve short.) Advanced players can judge the depth reflexively as the ball is leaving the paddle or sooner. With practice, you should be able to do so before the ball bounces on the server's side of the table.You do have to judge it quickly as it takes time to set up an attack. So how can you practice this? Get a coach or practice partner and have them serve to you! Ideally, have them do "half-long" serves, where the second bounce, given the chance, would either bounce very close to your end-line, or just off it. You get to judge which it is. It can be difficult to tell if a ball is going to go one inch long or short, but you should be able to judge it so that if the ball goes six inches off, you always loop it. And then four inches, and so on. Top players are masters of judging this to within an inch or so, and instantly jumping on serves that go too long.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3039title: February 11, 2019 - Wanting to Win Versus Hating to Losedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:These are both great incentives in practice. Some want to win so badly that they'll practice, hour after hour, to achieve their goals. Others hate losing so much that they'll use it as incentive to train forever to avoid it. A little of both often helps.The problem comes when you have to play a match - and that's when hating to lose becomes a problem. For some, it might help in practice, but in a match it's a quick way to choke away as you nervously play to avoid losing rather than playing to win. If you play to win, then you'll focus on doing what's needed to win, and you'll be so focused on that that you won't even think about losing, and so won't get nervous or choke.Where are you on the "Want to Win" vs. "Hate to Lose" spectrum? Here's a simple test. If, at the instant that you lose a close match, you are surprised, that means you were focused on winning, which is what you want. If, however, you are not surprised at that instant, you were focused on not losing, and that very type of thinking might be what brought on the loss.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3036title: February 4, 2019 - Straighten the Belt and the Rest Falls into Placedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Imagine when playing that your body is a belt. If your feet are in the wrong position, or if your grip is off, then it affects everything in between. If your foot positioning and grip are both correct, then like a belt that's been straightened, everything in between falls into place. Isn't that a great analogy?As a coach, I've noticed that most technique problems come from improper foot positioning or grip problems, although many players (and some coaches) often treat the symptoms instead of the root cause. When you fix the root cause - often the two ends, i.e. the foot position and grip - the rest often falls into place. Not always - longtime problems with foot positioning and grip can create bad habits, and they can be hard to break. But getting the two ends right is a great step in that direction, and one of the top priorities with new players so they develop good technique from the start.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3034title: January 28, 2019 - Progressive Drills to Improve Rallying Skillsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players rally very well in drills, but not so much in matches. Once they get into a match, they not only lose consistency, but they also rally like a drill, hitting the ball right back at the opponent rather than trying to win the point with placement. Here is a progression of drills you can do to solve this problem - but do them in this specific order. (If working with a partner instead of a coach, take turns.) The key is to first build up accuracy from both the forehand and backhand sides, then do so off random balls, while always attacking (and reacting to) the three spots you should always go after in a match – wide forehand, wide backhand, and middle. (People often forget to practice shots to the middle and reacting to such shots, and so can't do either effectively in a match.) A few notes:Do each drill until you are proficient at it. After that, perhaps two minutes each as you work your way through the progression. Once proficient at each, you should be proficient at these types of rallies in matches. (You don't necessarily have to do all of these drills every practice session from here on, but once you gain proficiency in them, you should come back to them regularly as a "tune-up.")The middle is where partner's elbow (roughly the midpoint between forehand and backhand) would be in a rally, typically a little to the left of the middle line (for a righty). For these shots, partner stands toward the middle and plays his choice of forehand or backhand."Side to side random" means partner goes randomly to both corners, but not middle."Complete random" means partner goes randomly to all three spots, the corners and the middle.Drills ProgressionForehand to forehand warm-up.Backhand to backhand warm-up.Forehand down the line to partner's backhand.Forehand to partner's middle.Backhand down the line to partner's forehand.Backhand to partner's middle.Alternate forehand and backhand, to partner's backhand.Alternate forehand and backhand, to partner's forehand.Alternate forehand and backhand, to partner's middle.Random side to side, to partner's backhand.Random side to side, to partner's forehand.Random side to side, to partner's middle.Complete random, to partner's backhand.Complete random, to partner's forehand.Complete random, to partner's middle.Both sides serve topspin and rally placing the ball to any of the three spots – forehand, backhand, or middle.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3032title: January 21, 2019 - The Grinding Mentality - How to Play It and Against Itdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The Grinder is a style of play, or really a mentality, where your single-minded focus is on not making any mistakes or iving the opponent any easy shots. This often means trying to stretch out rallies as long as possible, since the Grinder isn't making many mistakes or giving the opponent many chances to end the point. It's a defense-oriented way of playing, usually by choppers and blockers, the latter sometimes blocking with long pips on one side. It basically means you grind out each point. It doesn't mean the Grinder doesn't attack, but when he does, it's usually either to throw off the opponent's timing or to end the point off a weak ball.Mentally, the goal here is to "break" the opponent, who becomes so impatient at finding a good shot to end the point that he starts trying low-percentage shots, and so makes mistakes and loses. Often he falls into the trap of thinking, "Jeez, he won't miss, so I better attack harder to force him to miss." This rarely works.If you play a defensive style, you should develop the grinder mentality, where you simply refuse to miss or give the opponent anything easy to attack. If the rallies go long, you are happy, as you know the pressure is on the opponent to find a way out of these long rallies, and if he can't, you win.But how does one play the Grinder? It's all about finding the right mixture of patience and decisiveness. First, find the weakest part of the Grinder's defense. Find out what serves, receives, and rallying shots give the Grinder the most trouble. Since they are focused on keeping the ball in play, they often are passive against deep serves, so perhaps serve long, spinny serves that give you lots of time to follow up. For receive, mostly play safe as there's no point in making an error attacking a serve when you can just push it back and look for an easier attack.In rallies, usually the weakest spot for the Grinder is the middle, roughly the playing elbow, midway between forehand and backhand, though for many Grinders, the middle is slightly to the forehand side. By attacking the middle, you often force a weaker, erratic return as the Grinder has to decide whether to use forehand or backhand, you take away the extreme angles, and you force the Grinder out of position, often opening up a corner to attack.But the single most important thing about playing the Grinder is being both patient and decisive. Keep picking away at him with serves and rally shots, looking for balls you can easily attack. Don't force it; if the shot's not there, don't take it. This doesn't mean you don't attack unless you get an easy ball, but that you should only attack consistently until you get the right one to end the point. Instead of trying to loop hard against the Grinder's often very good push, slow loop it, and look to see if you can end the point on the next shot. If you can't, continue playing consistent until you do get the right shot.While you probably don't want to try beating the Grinder in a pure consistency battle - that's his strength - you also don't want to feel like you have to go for low percentage attacks. Take your time, play the percentage shots as you pick away at the Grinder's defense, and then - when you get the shot you've been working for - WHAM!!! End the point.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3030title: January 14, 2019 - If You Can't Do It Without a Ball, How Can You Do It With the Ball?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Shadow-practice is when you practice a stroke without the ball. It's the best way to develop proper technique and streamline your strokes, especially with help from a coach or experienced player. You do need to combine it with practice at the table, with a ball, so that you can develop the stroke with proper timing and racket angle. But trying to do all of this at once is difficult, and shadow-practice allows you to zero in on just getting the technique right.So . . . when should you shadow-practice?Suppose one of your strokes doesn't feel right. Do you think you have a better chance of getting it right by practicing it while also trying to hit a moving ball, or by shadow-practicing it until you make a habit of doing it right, and then doing it with a moving ball?Suppose you miss a shot because you didn't do a stroke properly. Do you think you have a better chance of getting the stroke right the next time, perhaps in the next rally, by not practicing it until then, or by immediately shadow-practicing the stroke as it should have been done?Suppose you miss a shot because you misread the incoming ball's spin, speed, depth, or height. Do you think you have a better chance of getting it right the next time by doing nothing, or by immediately shadow-practicing the shot as you should have done it, so your subconscious can better connect what to do with any given shot?Do you think you have a better chance of improving your strokes by only practicing them when also hitting a moving ball, or by regularly shadow-practicing them to develop the proper technique?If you watch the top players, especially during their developing years, you'll notice that most regularly shadow-practice their shots. When they miss a shot, many will shadow-practice the shot as they should have done it. There's a direct correlation between those who shadow-practice to get their shots right and quickly improve, and those that don't and don't improve nearly as quickly.So . . . why not make shadow-practice a part of your practice routine?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3028title: January 7, 2019 - Top Ten Things to Remember in Doublesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most players play doubles as if it were just a version of singles, but that's a mistake. Doubles is actually far more complicated since there are two players on each side, so there are four different playing styles interacting, plus all the movement as players alternate shots. But you don't need to spend years mastering all these complications to play good doubles. Here's a Top Ten list of things to remember in doubles.Signal serves. Let your partner know what's coming! Sometimes the receiver signals the serves, since he's the one who has to follow them up. Typically, signal under the table by pointing a finger down for backspin, thumb up for topspin, sideways for sidespin, and make a fist for no-spin. It's normally assumed the serve will be short, but if you are serving long, point a finger at the opponents to signal it.Serve to set up your partner. Discuss with him what he's most comfortable with.Normally don't serve long. If you serve long, it's usually easier to attack. At the higher levels, very few serves are long. At the lower levels, it might be effective if the receiver can't loop it or otherwise attack it effectively.Normally don't serve too wide. This gives the receiver a wide angle into the forehand, which could give your partner a problem. This is a triple problem, as your partner will have to cover the wide angle, he'll be out of position for the next shot, plus you might be in his way.Serve low. It's amazing how many players think their serves are low until they have to serve to someone who knows where your serve is going, as in doubles, and is receiving with their best shot. In doubles, you really need to serve low!Receive to set up your partner. Talk to him so as to find out what he is most comfortable with. You should often receive to the left, so the server gets in his partner's way.Attack deep serves. For this reason, most players receive forehand. But if you have a strong backhand attack, then there's no reason you shouldn't receive with your backhand. Some players set up to receive forehand, so they can attack deep serves, but when they see the serve is going short, will reach in and receive backhand, either pushing or flipping.Don't move too much sideways. This is the natural reaction of most players to get out of the way of their partner, but it means they are out of position for the next shot. Instead, step backwards just enough to allow your partner move in front of you. As he hits his shot, you start to move into position, and right after he hits his shot, you move into the table and into position. Try to move into position to favor your strongest shot. For example, a righty with a strong forehand wants to stand a little to the left. One special case - if the opponents play the ball wide to the right, it means your partner has to move wide to the right. If you are a righty, this is the perfect opportunity to step back out of your partner's way, move to the left, and then step in, so that you are in perfect position for the next shot.Place your rally shots. Most often hit the ball back toward the player who hit at you, or to the side away from his partner, so he gets in his partner's way. But beware giving the opponent's an easy angle they can use against your partner.No squabbling!!!When there's a problem, discuss it as teammates, because you are a TEAM.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3023title: December 31, 2018 - The Next Point is the Biggest Point of Your Lifedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:What's the most important point in table tennis? The next one. It's that simple. And yet players constantly fret over the previous point, the one that's over and never to be replayed. As far as you are concerned the next point is for the gold medal at the Olympics. If it's a practice match where you are working on something, you might ease up tactically so you can work on specific shots or tactics, but other than that, you should go all-out every point.Jan-Ove Waldner, considered by many to be the greatest player of all time, was once asked what his greatest strength was, and his answer was that it was his ability to always consider the next point the most important point of his life - and play it as such. If you make this a habit, two things happen. First, you always play your best. And second, you get so used to playing "the most important point of your life" that when you do play a big point, you are used to doing so. And guess what? You'll be so used to it you won't even be nervous!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3021title: December 10, 2018 - Punish Passivitydate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you play an opponent who plays passively, he's basically daring you to take your best shot. Take the dare! But first - what is your best shot against this player, and how do you get it into play successfully? The problem passive players face is that a good tactical thinker knows what his best shot is against this player, how to get it into play (often with serve and receive), and where it should go. Players like this terrorize passive players. But many players simply haven't thought it throughtactically, and so fall victim to these passive players, whose main strength is they let you beat yourself. So rather than beat yourself, think it through, decide what serves, receives, and shots will set up the shots that will beat this player, and beat him instead!If he can still beat you, then he's just a stronger player. So . . . what should you do? Now it's time for somestrategicthinking; figure out what serves, receives, and shots you need toimproveso you will have the weapons to tactically beat this player. Then practice them and use them until you are good at them.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3019title: December 3, 2018 - Style Disadvantage or Tactical Problem?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players do not know the difference between a style disadvantage and a tactical problem. My experience is that style disadvantages are relatively rare, as any sufficiently advanced player has developed enough shots to reach his level so that he can compete with almost any other style at his level. There are exceptions, of course, but they are rarer than most believe. And when there is a seeming style disadvantage, most often it's not really a "style" disadvantage so much as one player not being used to playing a specific style. That's a different thing.But the reality is that style disadvantages are not that common. Whatiscommon, besides not getting to play a specific style often enough to get used to it, is the problem of getting into the habit of tactically playing certain styles the wrong way, without realizing it. Related to this is not developing the often simple techniques that beat a specific style.For example, you may get blocked down over and by a good blocker, counter-hitter, or chopper because you can't get through their seemingly impenetrable defense - and never realize that it's because you are reflexively going to the corners instead of the playing elbow, where such defenses often fall apart. Or you might be unable to deal with a looper's serve and loop, and never realize you are feeding him by just pushing long over and over, often to the same spot. (Other options: pushing short; aiming for one corner and at the last second going the other way; flipping; and at minimum making your pushes relatively quick, fast, heavy, low, and deep.) Or you might struggle with an opponent's heavy push receive - and never realize it's because you are using the same backspin serves over and over, and not giving him low, no-spin serves, which they not only will tend to pop up, but will be unable to generate nearly as much backspin against them. (Learn to do "heavy no-spin," where you fake backspin but serve a low, short no-spin serve.)There are many examples - but the first step to overcoming this problem is to realize it exists, and deal with the problem.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3017title: November 26, 2018 - Use Your Weaknesses or They Will Always Be Weaknessesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Suppose, for example, you have a strong forehand loop against backspin, but your backhand loop against backspin isn't so good. Then you probably use the forehand every chance you can, and avoid using the backhand loop. Result? You continue to have a strong forehand loop against backspin, but that backhand loop isn't going to improve by not using it.One of the best wins of my life came when I was serving at 19-all in the third (back when games were to 21). I'd been serving and forehand looping the whole match, but the opponent had gotten used to it, and kept counterlooping winners off it. But recently I'd been working on my much weaker backhand loop a bit - and so, twice in a row, for the first time in the match, I serve and backhand looped instead. The opponent was so caught off guard he missed both outright and I won. If I hadn't been working on that weakness so that it became a useful weapon, I would likely have lost that match.In practice matches, and even in more competitive matches (so you can learn to do it under pressure), you have to make yourself use the shots that are your weaknesses. If you don't, they will continue to be weaknesses. You might get away with the weakness against players your level, but wouldn't it be nice to challenge players a level higher? To do so, you have to develop your weaknesses, and perhaps even turn them into strengths. You might be surprised at how much an unused shot can improve if you decide to make it central to your game for a few weeks or months!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3015title: November 19, 2018 - Forehand Stroke Efficiencydate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most top players extend their arm on forehands for extra power. And so should you. But have you noticed how top players can do these power shots over and over in quick succession, while weaker players struggle on the second one? A primary reason for this is the backswing.Top players extend their arm just before they start the forward swing, with some keeping it mostly extended through the stroke, others using more arm snap so that the arm comes in. But there's no reason to extend the arm on the backswing, which just slows you down. But many non-top players do this, so that their arm is equally extended on the backswing and forward swing. This is a mistake. On the backswing, keep the elbow relatively in to increase the stroke's efficiency. It's only when you have nearly completed the backswing that the arm can extend. If you extend it too early, the stroke will be slow and cumbersome, and when you do two in a row, you'll be rushed and inconsistent.Here's a video of Ma Long looping- see how his arm is in during the backswing, then he extends it.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3014title: November 12, 2018 - Subconscious Aiming and Strokingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The reason you practice your strokes is to make them second nature, so that you do the shots subconsciously and instinctively. When you try to take conscious control, the shot falls apart. Similarly, you don't aim a shot by aiming; you aim by visualizing what you want the ball to do, and letting your trained subconscious instinctively do the rest.Here's a test I've done many times. I can put a water bottle on any part of the far side of the table, bounce a ball on my side, and smack the bottle probably 90% of the time. But I don't do any of it consciously, other than bouncing the ball. It's all subconscious and instinctive. All I have to do is decide I want to hit that bottle, and the subconscious does the rest. If I try to take conscious control of the stroke in any way when aiming for the bottle, my accuracy falls apart.The same is true in a game situation, where you don't consciously aim or control any other part of the stroke; you just instinctively decide what shot to do and where you want the ball to go, and then instinctively do it. It's all subconscious; that's why you practice your strokes! (Sometimes it's hard to distinguish between the two. For example, you might, in the middle of a rally, see an opening where you want to hit the ball, but most likely your subconscious has already seen and reacted to that opening, and your conscious mind only notes it as you are about to do it.) The conscious part is between points when you decide what serves and basic tactics to use. And then - you guessed it! - the subconscious instinctively does the rest.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3011title: November 5, 2018 - Heavy and No-Spin Pushesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:A good, quick, well-placed, heavy, low, deep push is valuable at all levels, even the world-class level. So develop all aspects of that shot, especially against backspin or no-spin serves. But there's another weapon that many forget, and that's the no-spin push.Against your heavier push, many opponents will simply drop their racket and spin more, and you'll face a non-stop series of aggressive loops. But one way to really break this up is to throw a "heavy" no-spin push at them. A heavy no-spin push is a push where you fake great backspin, but put little spin on the ball. (This is the same as a heavy no-spin serve, where you fake spin but little spin on the ball.) The opponent, who is so used to lifting against your heavy backspins, will likely drop his shoulder and lift, and the ball will sail off the end. Note that while a "no-spin" serve is exactly that, a "no-spin" push usually has a small amount of backspin, though not always.But the real weapon here is that it not only wins the point, but now the opponent will likely hesitate each time, not sure if the ball is heavy backspin or not. And so he'll not only make mistakes against the no-spin pushes, but against the heavier ones he had no trouble with earlier.How do you do a heavy no-spin push? Just do a conventional heavy push, except don't graze the ball much, and more importantly, snap the wristaftercontact. For heavy backspin, of course, you snap the wrist into the ball to create all that backspin. Develop a heavy backspin push as a top priority, both because it alone is effective, and because a no-spin push isn't that effective if you don't also have a heavy one.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3009title: October 29, 2018 - Don't Try So Hard When Ending the Pointdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When you put everything into a shot, you lose control and consistency. You often lose power as well as you can't really time all your muscles together at 100%, and instead end up with a spastic shot that's difficult to control. Watch the top players - when they end the point, they make it seem almost effortless as they get great power by putting their weight into the shot and smoothly timing all of their muscles together. Plus, that last bit of power isn't necessary.So when you get a weak ball where you can end the point, don't go spastic. Instead, just smoothly accelerate into the shot, whether you are smashing or looping, putting your weight into the shot and focusing on good technique and placement. (Lack of power almost always means poor technique.) Unless the opponent is a great lobber, there's no way they can cover the entire table against a well-placed put-away, even with less than 100% power. That means experimenting with placement in matches to see what works - sometimes smashing or loop-killing at the wide corners and sometimes at their middle (around the playing elbow, the transition point between forehand and backhand). Few players can cover a well-angled put-away to the wide corners, even at 10% reduced speed, and even fewer can cover this shot if it's right at their elbow. (Unless, of course, they play with the Seemiller or some similar grip, where the middle is easier to cover, but the corners more difficult.) By sacrificing perhaps 10% speed, you get a huge return on consistency, and the 10% you lose simply isn't necessary.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3007title: October 22, 2018 - Top Ten Ways to Be a Professional at All Levelsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:This tip won't help you win more matches. In fact, it might cost you a match where, by playing unsportsmanlike, you might have psyched an opponent out of a match. But if you do that, did youreallywin the match? Here are the Top Ten Ways to Be a Professional at All Levels.Dress neatly.Show up on time.Let both sides warm up in the two-minute warm-up at the start.Play fair. Duh.Don't act like a baby.Don't make excuses.Shake hands afterwards.Do not scream at the top of your lungs every point. Use common sense. If you are one of a dozen or more players playing, then every time you scream you are disturbing all those other players. If, however, you are the only match being played, then you have more discretion - but within limits.Keep gamesmanship to a minimum. Some gamesmanship is fine, such as playing a little faster when your opponent is falling apart, or slowing things down to throw a hot opponent off. But others are not, such as talking to the opponent to distract him, or stepping on the ball so as to force a break to get a new ball.Keep arguing to a minimum. If you can't reach a quick agreement on something during a tournament, call an umpire. If it's practice, is it really worth arguing over?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3005title: October 15, 2018 - Style Experimentationdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players know their own game, but don't really know or understand other styles - leading to tactical problems. How can you work out what tactics to use if you don't understand the style you are playing? For example, a looper might feel like he can't get through a blocker's seemingly impenetrable wall - but only because he doesn't know the style. If he did, he might realize how weak a blocker often is in the middle (or sometimes a slightly to the forehand side of the middle), and so continue to pound the corners, where the blocker is often strongest. An attack to the middle not only gives the blocker trouble, it draws him out of position, which often opens up the corners.Here are two ways to overcome this. One way, of course, would be to simply experiment and learn from the results. (Make sure to pay attention to these results and keep learn from them!) But another way is to actually experiment byplayingother styles. If you are a looper, try playing some matches as a blocker, and vice versa. Try chopping, lobbing, one-winged or two-winged looping, hitting, and perhaps even other grips. You will learn a lot by playing these styles - and then apply what you learn tactically to your own game. You also may develop some new dimensions to your own game as you learn these other techniques!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3003title: October 8, 2018 - Counterlooping and the Forehand Blockdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:At the higher levels, most players essentially counterloop any topspin ball on the forehand side. (Many also do it on the backhand side.) But that's almost inhuman. And yet, many players try to do that. Here's the problem with doing that.If you play close to the table and try to counterloop everything on the forehand side, you'll be vulnerable to any strong, deep loop, since you'll have little time to react. The smart players will also vary the placement, sometimes going wide, sometimes at the middle. And so you will likely make too many mistakes.If you take a step off the table so you can react and forehand counterloop, you'll be vulnerable to slow, spinny loops that drop in front of you. These balls are easy to counterloop away (or smash) if you are close to the table and don't hesitate, but if you are a step off the table looking to counterloop, they are very tricky to counterloop - most players go off the end over and over.So what do you do? Simple - find a distance where you can comfortably forehand counterloop against most topspins, including slow, spinny ones. But also develop your "reflex block," where you forehand block against very aggressive balls to your forehand. You can also block the first one and perhaps then take half a step back so you can counterloop the next one. Since you'll only be blocking against faster loops, practice against those, and unhesitatingly counterloop (or perhaps smash) anything slower. (All of this can also apply to the backhand side, though many find counterlooping on that side trickier since the body is in the way.)On the other extreme, many players only block against incoming loops, on forehand and backhand. That's a weakness - learn to attack a weak loop, whether by counterlooping or smashing, or at least a very aggressive block.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3001title: October 1, 2018 - How to Punish those Slow, Spinny Loopsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:It's almost a cliché that players have more trouble with slow, spinny loops than faster ones, at least below the higher levels. There's a simple reason for this - slow, spinny loops are mostly against backspin, and come out with a higher spin-to-speed ratio than a loop against a block. But guess how we practice most of our blocking against loops? You guessed it - with someone looping against your block. And so you pretty much ingrain blocking in such a rally, but are completely unprepared in a match when your opponent loops against one of your pushes or backspin serves and the ball has that extra spin, and drops more quickly than you are used to.When he does this, your own backspin increases the amount of spin he can produce, resulting in a spinnier loop than you are likely used dealing with. The ball arcs more sharply, drops in front of you, and jumps out at you with a low, quick bounce. When you hit the ball, the ball also jumps more than normal. So every one of these differences is working against you.How should you deal with it? You have to adjust to the ball bouncing shorter than you are used to, and with more spin. To deal with the ball coming shorter, you have to do three things: stay closer to the table (or step in when you see the ball coming slower and dropping short), do not hesitate, and aim lower. The reality is these slow, spinny loops areeasyto attack -ifyou do all three of these things. If you do, you shouldn't just block; you should block aggressively, smash, or counterloop. But most players simply aren't used to dealing with this shot, and so mess up at least one of them. (Most common problem - hesitation. It takes practice to unhesitatingly go after these slow, spinny shots.)How do you practice against them? You could just do so in games, like most players, or perhaps do a drill where your partner serves, you push, he loops, and you play out the point. But you can get far more and better systematic practice by doing a modified multiball drill. Get a coach or practice partner, and a bucket of balls, and do this drill. Your partner serves backspin, you push, partner loops slow and spinny, and you block or counter-attack. Do notcontinue the rally; as soon as your partner finishes his loop, he reaches for the next ball and does it again. This allows you lots and lots of practice against a slow, spinny loop in a short period of time. And your partner gets lots and lots of practice looping against backspin. Then you switch and you do the looping. So it's a win-win drill for both.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/3000title: September 24, 2018 - Top Ten Guidelines for Playing the Unconventional Styledate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When a conventional player plays an unconventional style, they each face a different fundamental problem. The conventional player has to deal with the fact that the unconventional player is used to playing conventional players while he is likely not as used to playing this unconventional style. The unconventional player has to deal with the fact that he has, almost by definition, an inferior style, or it would be the conventional style. The conventional player has an edgeIFhe gets used to the unconventional player. The problem is he often goes into the match with a number of trained habits or reactions that will hurt his play. He may even know what some of these problems are, but they are so ingrained into his game from playing conventional players that the habits are hard to break in a sport where you are forced to react quickly and reflexively. Here is a list of the Top Ten Guidelines for Playing the Unconventional Style. But remember - they are onlyguidelines, as unconventional styles vary.Don't jam the table in rallies. He's more used to your game than you are used to his, so you need more time to react to his shots.Keep the ball deep. He's used to your game more than you are used to his. By going deep, you give yourself more time to react.Serve long. If you like to serve short and attack, then you may find yourself in a trap as your opponent can hit quick, off-the-bounce returns and rush you with shots you may not be comfortable against. This is especially true against racket surfaces you are not as familiar with.Find the weak spots. By definition, all unconventional styles have weaknesses or those styles would be conventional. Find the weaknesses and play into them. This is where it might be helpful to do some scouting or ask the advice of coaches or advanced players who are familiar with this player or style.Experiment. Test them out early with whatever you have and see what works.Spin or no-spin. Most unconventional styles have trouble either with heavy spin or no-spin. (The latter is especially true of pips-out, especially longer pips.) Test them out.Do not go into game two without being completely comfortable against this style. You should fight like crazy to win game one, but don't worry about losing that game as long as you know exactly what to do in game two, and are now comfortable against this unconventional style. Ideally, you should do this earlier in the first game, but unconventional styles have a long history of winning game one and then losing three straight.Do not rely on conventional tactics until you test them and verify they work. Before the match you should literally list all the things you do against conventional styles that likely will not work in this match. Often you will want to do the exact opposite of what you would do against conventional players. Remember that unconventional players have developed their style against conventional players, and so are often at their best against conventional tactics.Be flexible in your tactics. If something doesn't work, try something else. If something works but stops working, put it aside and try something else, and perhaps come back to it. Often the unconventional player can adjust to any one tactic, but cannot do so against multiple options. So work out multiple options against whatever he does and makehimuncomfortable.Keep your cool. It's very easy to mentally fall apart early in a match against an unconventional player. Accept the fact that his unconventional play is often based on the idea of throwing weird stuff at you, with the idea of forcing you into mistakes. But in so doing, he's also playing a weaker style. So don't worry about making a few careless mistakes or even blowing a game. Once you figure the player out, you can come back from almost any score - as long as you keep your cool and focus.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2996title: September 17, 2018 - Development of an Outrageously Great Spin Servedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Here are five steps to doing so!Spin and catch. Practice tossing the ball up, spinning it with your paddle, and catching it. Do this over and over, in various ways with different spins, until you can put an outrageous amount of spin on the ball, with different types of spins.Spin the serve. Now do the same thing at the table, where you focus, again, on putting outrageous amounts of spin on the ball. Don't worry at first about serving legal or low, just get lots of spin on the ball. As you get better, make sure you are doing so legally (especially the six-inch toss) and low to the net.Spin with variations. Now that you can serve with outrageous spin, learn to do different variations. Try serving with backspin, side-backspin, sidespin, side-topspin, and topspin. And don't forget one of the great serves of table tennis - fake that outrageous spin, but contact the ball near the handle with a stiff wrist so there's no spin, and then exaggerate the wrist and arm motionaftercontact - i.e. "heavy no-spin."Spin with semi-circular deception. Now is where you add real deception. Use a semi-circular motion in your serve. For example, for a forehand pendulum serve (i.e. racket tip down), start with a downward motion, then go sideways, and then up, all in a smooth semi-circular motion. Depending on where you contact the ball in this semi-circle, you'll get different spins. If on the down, backspin. If on the sideways part, sidespin. If on the upward part, topspin. Plus the in between spins - if you contact on the ball as the racket moves down and sideways, you get sidespin-backspin. If you contact the ball on the sideways and up part, you get sidespin-topspin - which tends to be trickier to learn with this particular serve, but comes with practice.Spin with quick, deception motion. Now that you can serve all sorts of different outrageous spins with a semicircular motion, it's time to shorten and speed up the motion. By making it shorter and quicker, it's harder for the opponent to read what direction the racket was moving at contact. And then, just after contact, move the racket in a different direction, further throwing off the receiver.Perfect these steps, and you too can have an outrageously great spin serve, with great spin and deception - and with practice, there's no reason why you can't do this as well as the pros.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2994title: September 10, 2018 - Develop Ball Control by Playing with Different Surfacesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Today's tip will be controversial. Some might not agree the following, but I've found it to be consistently true, and it makes sense if you think about it.Have you ever noticed how some players seem to have great ball control? They can seemingly adjust to any shot and make nice, smooth returns. How do they do this? They do it because they are in thehabitof adjusting to incoming balls. Some do this somewhat naturally. Others are in more of a rut, with their subconscious stubbornly doing what it's used to doing, and so not adjusting to balls that are different. These players need a little extra, more extreme practice.You can and should practice against shots that give you trouble with your regular racket. But using the same racket all the time minimizes the amount of adjustment you must make. If you really want to learn to adjust toanything, try something more drastic. Get a different racket - slower or faster blade or sponge, short pips, hardbat, sandpaper, even wood - and play with it for a while. As you adjust to this different playing equipment, you are literally training your subconscious to make adjusting ahabit.Then, when you go back to your normal racket, your subconscious will have this new adjusting habit. Instead of stubbornly doing what it is used to doing - and so not adjusting to incoming shots, leading to a lack of consistency and ball control - your subconscious now has the habit of adjusting, and so you'll suddenly have consistency and ball control. You don't need to do this very often; a few times is enough. Give it a try, and see if it works!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2992title: September 3, 2018 - The Flat Smash That Isn'tdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players with good looping strokes, and others that don't, have trouble doing "flat" smashes because they don't understand what the shot is - or more exactly, what it isn't. The main thing to understand about a flat smash is that it is NOT flat. There is no such thing, in fact, as a good flat smash, except off a high ball that lands short enough so that you can hit straight on with consistency.The contact for a "flat" smash - which from here on I'll just call a smash - is a glancing upward blow that puts topspin on the ball. (This is against a ball that's not too high. If you are smashing a lob, then the stroke isn't really upward, but contact is still a glancing topspin stroke.) It's not as much topspin as a loop, but quite a bit more than it would seem from watching. The ball sinks into the sponge and into the wood, and then rebounds out with topspin. Without that topspin it would be difficult to control for three reasons.First, of course, the topspin is needed to pull the ball down. It is this topspin that gives a good hitter a powerful yet consistent smash.Second, hitting with an upward topspin stroke allows the player to make last-second adjustments. If you hit the ball flat, then the only way to adjust just before contact is by changing the racket angle, and it's almost impossible to control that at the last second - as a basic rule, never change your racket angle on a drive once you start your forward swing. But if you are swinging with an upward topspin stroke, you can easily increase or decrease the topspin part of the stroke as you adjust to the incoming ball.Third, if you do hit the ball flat, the ball will likely sail. If you hit it truly flat, it goes out like a knuckleball and shoots off somewhat randomly. If you are off by just a touch and put a tiny amount of backspin, that will make the sail out of proportion to the amount of spin on the ball, due to the ball's speed, and the ball will shoot off the end.If you want to see just how much a smash is an upward stroke, watch how the old hardbat players hit the ball, where their "flat" shots are actually very upward shots, essentially upward slaps of the ball. Similarly, a sponge smash (unless the ball is very high) has to be an upward glancing blow, though not as much as with a less bouncy surface.Here's a great way to develop your smash with proper contact. Stand at one side of the table with a box of balls, and one by one, toss them in the air and smash them, using this upward glancing blow. When you can control this shot with a satisfying "smack," you are ready to do it at the table.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2989title: August 27, 2018 - Never Think About Winning or Losing While Playing - Excise the Thought and Play Well!date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:To some, this might be obvious. We've all had that experience where you wanted to win so badly that you get nervous, and your whole game fell apart. It might happen for a number of points, or might happen at that one incredibly important point that meant the difference between winning and losing.The reality is that most who understand this aren't really applying their thinking on this effectively. It's not enough toknowyou shouldn't think about winning or losing while you play; you have toactually not think about winning or losing when you play.How do you do this? For many, it means a big change in their thinking. Too often they play with the primary goal of winning, and if that's your primary goal, then rest assured that when it's close, and they are on the verge of winning or losing, they will be thinking about winning or losing.Instead, make it your primary goal to playwell. If you do this, then you will maximize your chances of winning, while if you make winning your primary goal, then you will essentially minimize your chances of doing so.Making it your primary goal to play well doesn't mean you play dumb. Part of playing well is playing tactically smart. In fact, your sole thinking at the table should be tactical, though only between points. (During a point you have to let your subconscious take over - that's why you practice, to train it for exactly that, so let it do its job.)How do you know when you've really maximized your playing by not thinking about winning or losing? When you do lose, if your goal was to play well, then there should be a moment of literal surprise when you realize, "Oh, I've lost." If you were thinking about winning or losing, this won't happen because you will have been completely aware of winning or losing - and that's exactly the type of thinking that often turns a probable win into a remorseful loss.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2987title: August 20, 2018 - How to Quadruple Your Chances of Winning Those Five-Game Matchesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:There are four main components that lead to winning close matches. Here they are!Have all of your shots going. In reality, you want to have them as ready as possiblebeforethe match starts, and by the end of game one you should be confident in all your shots. Some take longer to adjust to an opponent, but if you aren't comfortable or confident in your shots and it's already game five, you need to practice those shots and get them into play early in the match so next time theyareready when you need them.Get used to your opponent. You should be used to whatever your opponent does by the end of game one. If not, then perhaps early on in the match you need to focus on reacting to whatever it is he does that gives you trouble. If you have trouble with his slow, spinny loop, then perhaps push long and heavy on purpose one time, letting him slow loop so you can focus on reacting to it properly. If you have trouble in backhand exchanges, perhaps get into a few on purpose to focus on that. Of course, if you can tactically avoid a certain shot your opponent does, and are confident you can do that most of the time, then you can just do that - but you have to be used to and confident against whatever shots the opponent can get into play.Know what worked and what didn't. This is key - if you have a winning tactic but don't remember it, you'll probably blow the match. It's mind-boggling how often a player comes off the table thinking or saying, "Why didn't I do what worked before?" If you have a serve or shot that worked over and over, then use it. Many are afraid that the opponent is expecting it, but guess what? When youdon'tuse that serve or shot that gave him fits, that loud sound you hear is your opponent sighing in relief.Mentally strong. If you are a nervous wreck, worried about winning or losing, you might as well concede the match. Focus on execution and playing well (including tactically well), and you'll maximize your chances of winning.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2985title: August 13, 2018 - Make Up-and-Coming Players Your Rivals - and Stay With Them!date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Here's a little trick that will give you both incentive to improve, and lead to real improvement. Next time you are at your club, pinpoint someone who is perhaps a little weaker than you, or perhaps your level, but is practicing hard seems "talented," and is likely to improve beyond his currently level, and beyond yours. Often an up-and-coming junior would be your choice.Then make it your goal to 1) play this player as often as possible, and 2) keep up with him. Turn it into a mini-rivalry. You'll be surprised at how this will narrow your thinking down to what's needed to stay with this player, and you'll find yourself developing your game as you try to keep up, week after week and month after month. By playing him regularly when you are still better you will likely get him to keep playing you, even when he's caught up or (NO!) passed you, meaning you get to continue playing him and battling to stay with him.Much of improvement is mental, and if you truly turn this into sort of a rivalry (a friendly one, of course), you'll find yourself striving to play at levels you might not have considered before. Next thing you know you'll be practicing the shots you need to stay with him, thinking tactically, and you'll be dying to get to the club to continue this rivalry.And guess what? All of this will develop your overall game, and so you won't just keep up with this player (at least as long as possible), your whole game will go up. This means you'll be playing against better and better competition, which will drive your level up even more. So find that up-and-coming player, make him your rival, andstay with him!!!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2982title: August 6, 2018 - Training the Subconsciousdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Advanced players seem to always know exactly what shot to do and where to put it. It's one of the reasons why they are advanced. But there's no time during a point to really analyze the situation, so it's all done reflexively, i.e. the subconscious is calling the shots. How do you get your subconscious to do this? The answer is that your subconscious is always there, listening and watching, and if you let it know what you want it to do, it'll learn to do it.For example, suppose you realize that an opponent is weak when you attack his middle (his playing elbow). Between points you can tell yourself to go after his middle every chance you can. You don't need to say, "Hey, subconscious, attack the middle!" If you keep telling yourself to do something, it'll get the message.When it doesn't work - for example, an opponent attacks from the middle with his forehand - note when and why it doesn't work. Again, your subconscious will pick up on this, and if you decide you should attack the corners if your opponent is looking to play a forehand from the middle, the subconscious will get it - and it will start making reflexive decisions on whether to go after the middle or an open corner. The more you do it, the better you get at this and any other tactics you think about. The goal is to train your subconscious to reflexively play smart tactics in any given situation.I've met literally hundreds of very smart people who were good tactical analysts away from the table, but tactical disasters at the table because they never went through that stage of thinking about tactics at the table so as to train the subconscious.The converse to all this, of course - though it's not that obvious to many - is that if you keep telling yourself negative things between points, like "I can't make that shot!" or "I'm no good!" or "I'm choking!", the subconscious will pick up on that as well and reinforce and thereby magnify it,  which is why players who do negative self-talk have great difficulty improving, while those who are positive shoot up as fast as their subconscious can drive them.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2979title: July 16, 2018 - Follow Through Back Into Position After Forehand Loopingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Not all loops are the same, and not all follow-throughs are the same either.Imagine making a powerful forehand from your backhand side. Often the momentum of your shot will pull you even farther off to the side, leaving you helpless if the opponent returns your shot to your wide forehand. Instead, you should learn to be in position so that, as much as possible, you would follow-through back toward the table, not away, thereby putting yourself back into position for the next shot. You would also push off your left foot (for a right-hander) to get back onto position quickly.Now imagine making that same powerful forehand from the wide forehand side. (I'm about to use almost the exact same wording as the above, with a few strategic changes.) Often the momentum of your shot will pull you even farther off to the side, leaving you helpless if the opponent returns your shot to your wide backhand. Instead, you should learn to be in position so that, as much as possible, you would follow-through back toward the table, not away, thereby putting yourself back into position for the next shot. You would also push off your right foot (for a right-hander) to get back onto position quickly.Notice how you want to change your follow-through, depending on the location of your own shot? Far too many players, after attacking from a wide corner, stay there too long, and so cannot recover, when they should in fact make the recovery part of the follow-through. Much of this is about balance; if you are balanced throughout your shot, as you should, then you will have a much faster recovery, and will be able to play multiple powerful shots in a row from any part of the table.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2976title: July 9, 2018 - Pinpoint Your Weakness and Then Pinpoint a Drilldate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Far too often player do general drills, the type that are great for developing a foundation to their game, but not so great at fixing up specific problems in their own games. To use a completely nonsensical example, suppose you were horrible at spelling words that start with "Q." Would you practice for this by working on all of your spelling, or by practicing your spelling of "Q" words?Here's a table tennis example. Suppose you have trouble with slow, spinny loops. Perhaps you consistently block them off the end, or too high, or counterloop or smash them erratically. Suppose these slow, spinny loops are mostly against backspin balls. Would you then go out and practice your blocking against someone who loops over and over while you block? No, you'd need to practice against slow, spinny loops against backspin. These are two very different types of blocks.Instead, design a specific drill to turn the weakness into a strength. If you have trouble with slow, spinny loops, perhaps have your coach or practice partner serve backspin, you push, he loops slow and spinny, and you get to practice against the shot thatspecificallygives you trouble. Better still, get a box of balls, and have him serve and loop, butdon'tplay out the point - you practice against his slow, spinny loop as he's reaching for the next ball to serve and loop with. You get almost rapid-fire practice against exactly what you need work against, slow, spinny loops, and your partner gets lots of practice slow looping against backspin.You can apply this type of thing to any part of your game, where you aim to get lots and lots of practice against whatever it is that specifically gives you trouble. Go to it!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2973title: June 11, 2018 - How to Make Your Strengths Stronger with Serve and Receivedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Excluding serve and receive, what's the strongest part of your game, or the part that youwantto make the strongest part of your game? There's an old adage, to state the obvious, that practice makes perfect. But doing something in practice is not the same as doing it in a match. That's why so often you probably can do certain shots over and over in practice, but in matches the shot is not always there.For example, let's assume that the strongest part of your game is your forehand loop. (We could do a similar example for any shot, such as hitting, quick-blocking, aggressive backhands, and so on.) Let's do a thought experiment and imagine there are two clones of you. One of them, when serving, throws a lot of deep, tricky serves at his opponent, and looks for a relatively easy ball to loop or smash, and if he gets it, he attacks; otherwise, he does not. The other also throws out some tricky serves, but more often serves less tricky but varied short serves, which are more likely to set up a passive return he can loop - and he follows his serve up with a loopeverytime, unless the receiver does something to stop it. The first player, by using tricky deep serves more often (which force more outright mistakes but are easier to attack) and picking his shots better, may win more often - at first.But now we extend this into the future. Suppose the first player serve and attacks half the time, while the other serve and loops 3/4 of the time. After a time, the second player has had dramatically more practice at serve and looping in a game situation, and no longer needs a relatively easy ball to loop to get his best shot into play. He also has developed the habit of dominating on his serve, even if the receiver made a decent return. He not only dominates with his short serves, but makes his occasional long, tricky serves more effective since the receiver isn't as used to them since he doesn't use them as often. The first player is tactically smart, but the second player is strategically smart.You need both - tactical smarts to maximize your chances of winning a match, and strategic thinking for maximizing your improvement. You have to find a balance. But if you want to really develop your game, more often think strategically and use your serve and receive to develop your strengths so you can learn to dominate with them.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2967title: June 4, 2018 - Footwork at Different Physical Levelsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:You've all seen how fast the top players move, or can if you visit Youtube and do a search for "Table Tennis top players." And perhaps you are young enough or in such great shape that you too can learn to move like that. If so, work with a coach if possible, and someday maybe we'll be watchingyouon Youtube!But for most players, that type of footwork isn't really possible, and in fact that style of footwork won't work. Watch the top players move, and you often can't even tell which foot moved first, their left or right - even in slow motion it's tricky to tell, since they often move both feet together. Their footwork relies on great athleticism.If you can't move like that, but still want to develop decent footwork, even if you are way overweight or 80 years old, there are three keys.Always bounceslightlybetween shots. This will prepare your legs for moving on the next shot. There are many older and out-of-shape players who don't move fast, but they movewell, meaning they move to every shot - and this is one of the keys that allows this. They are often called "light on their feet" - and this is why.Assume you will move. Don't wait to see if you have to move - expect to, and only wait to see what direction you will be moving. Make it a habit that if you have to move one inch, you step one inch. Then you'll habitually step toeveryball.Start with a very short step with the near foot. If you have to move to the right, start with the right foot. If you have to move to your left, start with your left foot. This is how footwork was taught for years, and is probably still the proper way for most players.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2961title: May 29, 2018 - The Balance Between Tactical and Strategic Thinkingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:You should both tactically and strategically develop your game. What does this mean?First, let's define these terms. Tactical thinking is what you do when you are looking to win now. Strategic thinking is what you do when you are looking to develop in the long run. You need both.Let's assume you have a big weakness in your game - say, a weak blocking game. You could tactically find ways to hide this weakness, which is something you should do when needed in an important match. But the great majority of matches are practice matches where you should be developing your game. So instead, you should tactically realize you have a big weakness in your game, your blocking, and strategically play and practice to develop this weakness into a strength. But it starts with tactically understanding what parts of your game need strategic developing - both weakness and strengths, where the goal of the latter is to make them overpowering strengths by making them stronger and by developing more ways to get it into play.But if you always are playing strategically, you never develop the tactical skills to win a given match. The result is you might have a better game than an opponent, but you lose because the other player is better tactically. What this means is that if you only think strategically, your tactical skills will suffer.So you must find a balance. Decide in advance which matches you will focus on the strategic, and which ones on the tactical. Or sometimes play strategically until it's close, and then try to win tactically. Or the reverse, which many players neglect to do - when it's close in a practice match, if you always play tactically, you won't developed the deep-rooted confidence in the shots you are trying to develop, so sometimes try to win with those shots, even if it means occasionally - or often, at first - losing a match that you might have won.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2957title: May 21, 2018 - Develop Power Timing by Slappingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Power in table tennis comes primarily from timing. Not just timing with the ball, but timing the proper use of each muscle used, in the proper order and duration, while timing all this while also hitting the ball. For example, when forehand hitting or looping, you start with the back leg, then the hips, then the shoulders, then the arm, and then the wrist.Most players don't do this properly as they "short circuit" the proper muscle timing as they attempt to time the shot to a moving ball. Trying to learn these two together is like trying to learn to ride a bicycle and juggle at the same time. You would do better to learn each separately, and then put them together. Similarly, trying to time all these muscle movements just right and still hit the ball is not easy, unless you were trained properly early on as a kid. In that case, it's probably so second nature you don't even notice it, or realize how difficult this dance of the body is when you have to time it to an incoming ball that you have to then graze with a big swing!But there's a simple way of developing this proper muscle timing. Like most cases where you have to break a bad habit, you need to break it down to its simple parts. In this case, you could shadow practice, though you might need a coach to help you get it right. But there's another way to get it right -slapping!!!No, you shouldn't slap your practice partner, but what you should do isimaginedoing so, and go through the motion of slappingvery hard(i.e. use your entire body as in a forehand stroke) an imaginary stationary person in the face with a forehand swing. Why would you do this? The key here is 1) that it's a stationary target, and 2) your body will naturally time the muscles for maximum power, since it's not being short-circuited by the attempt to also hit a moving ball.Practice doing this for both regular forehands and forehand loops (where your slap comes from below) until you feel you have the muscle timing down for maximum power. And THEN go to the table and practice doing this with a moving ball. I've used the forehand as the example here, but the same principle applies to backhands - give your imaginary partner a big backhanded slap!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2951title: May 14, 2018 - Tactical Thinking Between Pointsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Everyone has their own tactical thinking ritual . . . or doesn't have one. If you don't, you should.What is a tactical thinking ritual? It's when you habitually think tactically about the next point. Different players have different rituals, but most are similar. Here are mine. Note that tactical thinking during a match should be kept simple. There are zillions of possible tactics, but your job is to find a few that work in the given match.When I have two serves coming up. This is probably where you should do the most tactical thinking, since you have complete control over what serves you will use. Before I come to the table I'm thinking aboutbothserves. My main thinking is whether I want to serve both short, both long, one of each, or whether I want to throw in a "trick" serve, such as fast no-spin to the middle, or a fast down-the-line. I have to decide if I want to serve to increase the probability I'll get a specific receive - such as a long push to loop, a topspin receive I can loop aggressively against, or a ball I can smash or loop kill. I also have to decide the placement of the serves, and the order. For example, if I decide the receiver is ready for my deep serves and I choose to serve both short, I might go for a very heavy backspin serve to the middle (to take away the extreme angles on the return), where I might be anticipating a push return I can loop, followed by a no-spin serve, where I'm hoping the receiver will push it like the previous backspin serve, and so pop it up or return it with less backspin. I might serve the second one to the same spot as I want the serve to look as much as possible like the previous one so the receiver will push it the same, thereby popping it up.When I have one serve coming up. Here is where I evaluate my previous plan based on what happened on the first serve. For example, using the example above, suppose the receiver backhand banana flipped my heavy backspin serve. I now have to make a judgment - should I serve short no-spin, hoping he misreads it, and risking another backhand attack? Or perhaps I should instead serve it short to the forehand? Or, since he's reaching over the table to attack with his backhand, perhaps a big, breaking sidespin serve deep to his backhand? Suppose the receiver pushed my heavy backspin serve into the net. Then maybe following up with a no-spin serve might not work, since he's already aiming a bit down? Or suppose he quick-pushed my backspin serve really wide, deep, and aggressively, so I had a difficult ball to attack, and think he might be able to do that as well to my no-spin serve? Then I might consider serving sidespin-topspin to get into a different type of rally.When I'm receiving. Here you can't have a firm plan since you don't know what serve you will get. However, you should always have at least two possible receives off any serve (preferably more), and before each receive, should decide which ones you should favor off the serves you expect to see. (But don't over-think this or you might freeze up.) For example, against a short backspin serve to the middle, I can push long or short, or flip, and I can do these to all parts of the table. Before the receive, I will decide if I'm going to be aggressive or not, and which side I should receive to. But these have to be flexible decisions. I may decide to push long to the backhand, but if the server looks like he's setting up for that shot, leaving his wide forehand open, I might change at the last second and quick-push there. Or the serve might pop up or be easy to read, in which case I might switch to an attack. If my opponent is consistently serving long to my backhand, I might decide in advance whether I'm going to receive backhand or do a step-around and forehand loop. (Note that you should also take into consideration what happened in the previous points when deciding what receive to use. For example, if you keep pushing long and the server keeps looping successfully, it's time to rethink your receive.)When I'm serving at in a deuce game. Now's the time to think over what worked and didn't work up to this point, especially recently. There should be 2-3 serving options that are the obvious ones to choose from - if you don't immediately know which ones you should be choosing from, you need to make it a habit to think about these things more as by this time you should have a very good idea what worked and what didn't. My first thought is always whether I should go for a "trick" serve to catch the receiver off guard, or a pure third-ball serve. It all depends on the opponent and his history that match, as well as my own confidence level in my own shots. If I'm playing really well, why risk, say, a tricky deep serve that might get looped, taking my own shots out of play? In most cases, think what serve will set you up to do what you do best, usually some sort of attack. But if there's a serve that's been giving the receiver fits, use it, even if the receiver has a good idea it's coming. You don't want to lose a match and have the opponent say, "Thank God you didn't use that serve I was having fits with!"===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2944title: May 7, 2018 - Serve and Attack . . . Almost Alwaysdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When serving, don'tlookfor a ball to attack. Unless the receiver does something to stop you from attacking, serve and attack over and over. If you aren't confident in your attack, then this will make your attack much stronger and turn you into a better player.There are tactical exceptions to this, but they are relatively few. Defensive players such as choppers and blockers might serve and only attack if they see a relatively easy attack, but even they should look to serve and attack every chance so as todeveloptheir attacks. Against a receiver with a weak attack you might tactically wait for a better shot rather than force the attack off your serve against a relatively good return - but even there it's good practice to serve and attack so you keep getting better at it. Sometimes it's good tactics to catch your opponent off guard by not attacking, such as a sudden drop shot or quick push against a player expecting you to attack and not ready to attack themselves. But generally, and perhaps even relentlessly, you'll find more success if you serve and attack whenever the receiver doesn't do something to stop you from attacking.None of this means you have to serve and rip a winner every time. You only do that if you do get a relatively weak return. Attacks should be varied - forehand or backhand; hard, medium, or soft; usually deep, but when attacking more softly vary the depth; to the opponent's middle (elbow) or wide corners, or even outside the corners; and with varying amounts of topspin and sometimes sidespin. Never serve and blindly attack; attack, but attack with purpose!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2935title: April 30, 2018 - Weaknesses Can Be Strengthsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you have a weakness, you try to avoid using it, correct? That's the normal thinking. However, sometimes a "weakness" can be a strength, plus (perhaps more importantly), if you use a weakness over and over, it might become a strength, or at least stop being a weakness.Here are two examples of a "weakness" being a strength. David Zhuang was six-times U.S. Men's Singles Champion. He was a pips-out penholder with a blocking backhand and hitting forehand. What was his "weakness"? Surprisingly, it was his forehand. He had a 2800 blocking game, especially on the backhand, and this raised his level so high that his forehand actually became his weakness. And so, relative to his game - which was 2700+ for years, because of his 2800 blocking - his forehand was relatively "weak." And yet few players came out on top by letting David hit forehands!I'll use myself as an example. For my level, my forehand loop was below average. Did that make it a weakness? No, because during my peak years I relied on serve, receive, and footwork to constantly get it into play at the start of rallies. It might not have been an overpowering loop like some players, who'd dominate every point if they got a chance to loop, but because I was better at getting it into play, it wore down opponents, not to mention taking their own loops out of play.Some "weaknesses" aren't really weaknesses, even if they could be improved. I use to coach Tong Tong Gong in tournaments, and he made the USA National Cadet Team twice with me coaching him in the Team Trials. The rap on him was always how weak and simple his serves were. And they were correct in that Tong Tong's serves were too simple, and needed more variation. He mostly served short backspin and short no-spin, almost always to the middle, with an occasional sudden deep serve. But what many missed was that this "weakness" was also a strength - by keeping his serves simple, Tong Tong likely had more control over his serves than just about anybody, and so could keep his serves so low that they practically skimmed the net, and then bounced low on the table. He followed all the rules onserving low. Players struggled to do anything with them, since their extreme lowness made them hard to flip, and so most players just pushed - and so Tong Tong would get the first attack, often with his nice backhand loop.But there's another reason to get your weaknesses into play, whether they are a "strength" or not - the more you use them, the better they get. I started out with a rather poor forehand loop, but by constant use in game after game (especially at the start of rallies) it became better and better until it was no longer really a weakness. If you have a weak backhand, a weak forehand, a weak block, or weak anything, the best cure (along with drill practice) is to make it central to your game, and then you'll use it over and over, it'll get better and better, and soon it will become a strength.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2929title: April 23, 2018 - Are You a 10-8 or an 8-10 Player?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Some players play best when their back is to the wall - when they are down 8-10, they come alive and play like champions. Others are best when they are ahead and have more confidence in going for their shots or playing their game - and play best when they are up 10-8. Or perhaps it's earlier in the game when a player might play his best when he's up or down, such as at 3-7 or 7-3.If you are one of these players, then you should take advantage of it. Suppose you play best from behind. Then when the score is 0-0, imagine that the score is 8-10 - and do this every point! It's especially effective near the end when nerves become a bigger factor - so if you are an 8-10 player and find yourself leading 10-8, image it's 8-10, and vice versa.This isn't a perfect system. Often a player comes alive near the end of a game because he's gotten used to the opponent, so you might have to work your way into the match, and use this mental technique only after you have done so. But once you are into the match, start imagining the score where you play your best, and you'll likely play your best. If you do this enough, soon you won't have to do this - from habit, you'll mentally begin to play your best at any score.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2925title: April 16, 2018 - If You Miss a Practice Session, You Will Knowdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The great writer Ray Bradbury wrote, in his bookZen in the Art of Writing, "Remember that pianist who said that if he did not practice every day he would know, if he did not practice for two days, the critics would know, after three days, his audiences would know."This quote applies to most pursuits where you might want to reach a high level, including table tennis. However, it only applies if you understand what Bradbury was actually saying. To some, he was merely making a factual observation. However, if that's your interpretation, I believe you are missing the point.To one who wishes to reach a high level in something -anything- it is the thinking involved that Bradbury was referring to. While it might be true that after two days of not practicing, the critics would know, and after three days, the audiences would know, what's key is that first day - that if he did not practice for one day,hewould know.Why is this important? Because a champion has high standards or he would not be a champion, and so must set those standards himself, and not rely on what the critics or audiences think. He knows that to reach and maintain those standards, he must practice every day, excluding rest days (generally once a week). And after those rest days, when he knows he's missed a day, if he's a champion (or wants to be a champion), he'll be raring to go, to make up for that missed practice day.Not everyone has time to practice every day, and you don't have to strive to be a champion in every endeavor. But you too should set a standard for how often you need to practice to reach your particular goals, and when you miss a session, you will know, and will strive to make sure it doesn't happen again. Hopefully, you won't miss so many that the critics and audience will know!!!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2918title: April 9, 2018 - How to Return Nets and Edgesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:There are two main problems with returning nets and edges. First, they catch you off guard because they come out unexpectedly in unpredictable ways. And second, there's no way to practice against them systematically.Except . . . neither of these statements are correct. Why is that?It is true that you never know when the opponent is going to get a net or edge, so it's unexpected, and it's true that they will come out in unpredictable ways, depending on how they hit the net or edge. But they shouldnotcatch you off guard - you should always be ready for anything. This means being in a ready position ready to react toanything, and that includes "unexpected" nets and edges that come out in "unpredictable" ways. Yes, they usually lower your chance of making a good return and winning the point, but that's no different than if the opponent faked a smash and instead did a short drop shot. You just have to react and do the best you can.It's also true that you can't systematically practice directly against nets and edges. Note the word "directly" that I stuck in there, because youcanindirectly practice against nets and edges. How? By always training to be as light on your feet as possible, in a good ready position, ready to react and move in any direction needed. This allows you to quickly react to "unexpected" and "unpredictable" shots, including nets and edges.Now let's suppose you've trained to always be ready to react to anything, and so you managed to get to that net or edge and are about to make a return. What do you do with it? In most cases, you should focus on controlling the ball back deep on the table, ideally with topspin or backspin. You should also place the ball. For example, against a strong forehand player who likes to play forehands from the backhand side, you might fake toward the backhand side, and then just roll, push, or chop the ball to the wide forehand, catching him going the wrong way. Or if he's s slower player with a strong forehand, perhaps fake to the forehand, then return deep to the backhand. The key is depth (which makes it harder for the opponent to rip the ball, or to attack at wide angles, plus giving you more time to react to the his shot), and doing something to mess him up, whether by putting spin on the ball, placing the shot, or faking one way and going another.And there's one other key thing to returning nets and edges:Don't Panic!!!Often players get flustered by such shots. Stay cool and react as best you can, and you'll be surprised how many points you can win off these shots. Don't worry about the unreturnable nets and edges - you have no control over them - and instead focus on the ones youdohave control over, and try to win those points.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2913title: April 2, 2018 - Arrange Practice Partners in Advancedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Think of all the times you've gotten a great warm-up, and then played great. Now think of all the times where you showed up at a tournament, a league, or just to play matches are your club, and never felt warmed up, never really got started, and so played poorly. Why did that happen? A key here is that part about not feeling warmed up. Do you think you have a better chance of playing well if you warm up with someone you feel comfortable warming up with, or by randomly doing so with whoever just happens to be available when you arrive?So why not take control of the situation and make sure you always get a good warm-up? It's simple - arrange in advance with someone to meet at a specific time, and then you assure yourself a good warm-up, and maximize your chances of playing well. Doing this for tournament and important league matches should be no-brainers - of course you should do so for those matches! But why not do it for practice nights as well? Then, after getting that great warm-up, you'll be ready to face anyone at the club, and play your best.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2908title: March 26, 2018 - Finding Simple Tactics That Workdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:I was going to write about this topic when I realized I didn't have to - I already had. Chapter One of my book, "Table Tennis Tactics for Thinkers," starts with this:"Tactics isn't about finding complex strategies to defeat an opponent. Tactics is about sifting through all the zillions of possible tactics and finding a few simple ones that work."What does this mean? Rather than explaining it again here, I'll simply quote from the book - and hopefully you will learn how to win the tactical battle and make the game simple and easy!Tactics isn't about finding complex strategies to defeat an opponent. Tactics is about sifting through all the zillions of possible tactics and finding a few simple ones that work.In simpler terms, the purpose of tactics is to mess up your opponent.You do this by messing up his game, and by forcing your game on his. More specifically, tactics is finding ways to get your strengths into play while avoiding your opponent's, and going after the opponent's weaknesses while not letting him go after yours. It's figuring out how you win and lose points.To do this, you have to know both your game and your opponent's. While you might go into a match not knowing much about your opponent (though ideally you would have scouted him out in advance), you should know all about your game. How well do you know your game?If you couldn't write a book about your game, either you don't know your game, or you have no game. (We'll get back to this shortly.)Table tennis is a game of utter complexity and utter simplicity. If you get too caught up in the myriad of complex strategies available, you'll be lost in a sea of uncertainty. Think KISS—"Keep It Simple, Stupid." Most matches are tactically won on at most two or three tactical things, not the zillions that are possible. It's finding those two or three out of the zillions that's key. On the other hand, if your thinking is too simple, you aren't maximizing your play.There's no conflict here. Much of tactics involves simplifying things so the game becomes simple and easy. If you use tactics that force your opponent into predictable returns that feed into your strengths, you've won the tactical battle and made the game simple and easy.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2901title: March 19, 2018 - Your Goal Should Normally Be to Win Playing the Style You Are Developingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:What does this mean? It doesn't mean you should blow big matches because you stubbornly refuse to play a smart tactic that's not how you normally play. What it means is that if you are trying to improve your game, then except in "big matches," you should focus on winning using the playing the style you are striving to develop. In other words, if it's not a big match, then it's somewhat of a practice match, and so you should be practicing your playing style.What is a big match? It's whatever you define it to be, but you should define it for yourself. For some, it's any tournament match or league match. For others, it's only a championship match. For still others, it's nearly every match they play - and that's a mistake. The large majority of matches you play should not be considered big matches.This doesn't mean you don't fight hard to win every match - you should. It means that, except in those big matches (where you should tactically do whatever you can to win), you should fight hard to win with the style you are trying to develop. (Note that sometimes, even in non-big matches, you might practice the tactics that win for that match rather than your playing style, but that's to develop tactical flexibility skills. Tactical rigidity is a recipe for poor tactics and poor play.)As an example, I've seen many players who are loopers who are afraid to loop many deep serves because they miss too often, and they are afraid of losing. So they instead return them passively, and are moderately successful at itat the level they are playing- and since tactically it's the right thing to do at the time to win, they keep doing it. But it's a trap - they are dramatically limiting their looping style and their improvement by not looping these serves. Instead, except for a big match where tactically it might be better (at that time) to return them passively, they should be looping those deep serves. That's how you become better at looping those deep serves, and become a better player in the long run!Another example are players who do not consistently try to follow up their serve with an attack, unless they get an easy ball. It might make tactical sense at the time, but it's a great hindrance to improvement. The primary purpose of the serve is to get the initiative, which almost always means by following it up with an attack. (If you want to improve, you should almost always follow your serve with an attack, unless the opponent returns your serve in such a way as to take away your attack. How you should attack depends on your playing style.So what shots should you be developing that you shy away from because you are afraid of losing? How much better will you be later on if you start using those shots, even if you temporarily lose some winnable matches?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2895title: March 12, 2018 - "Hot Anger" versus "Cold Anger"date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:It's best not to get angry when you play, period. And if you want to be a professional table tennis player, you better learn to control your emotions. (Even John McEnroe had his best tennis matches when he wasn't throwing fits.) However, if you do get angry sometimes in matches, then you should at least learn to channel your inner "rage."Ever get really mad about something, to the point that you couldn't think straight? That is "Hot Anger." It's pointless and should always be avoided. And yet that's what often happens in competitive matches, where a player gets angry either at himself, his opponent, the playing conditions, the tournament director or referee, or anything else. The result is poor focus, poor execution, and poor play.On the other hand, sometimes these anger issues can benefit you, if you know how to take advantage of them. If there's something that angers you, don't get "hot angry," get "cold angry." The difference is now you are thinking with ice-cold clarity with a single purpose in mind - overcome whatever it is you are angry at and beat your opponent. With "cold anger," you become single-mindedly focused and determined.Some top athletes truly thrive on this, even going out of their way to find slights against them to give them incentive to push themselves to the limit - but they do so with "cold anger." If a team is predicted to do poorly by the experts, players can use this as incentive with "cold anger" - but if they truly get angry at this, with "hot anger," then they will likely self-implode - and that often happens. So next time you feel "hot anger" coming on, change it over to "cold anger" and use it to your advantage.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2889title: March 5, 2018 - What You Should Be Watchingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most of the time you should be watching the ball, but not always. If the ball is moving slowly, you should watch it all the way into your racket. If the ball is moving fast, you can't react at the last second, so there's no point in watching the ball right to contact. In both cases, as soon as watching the ball no longer is beneficial, you should be looking up to watch your opponent. You should generally be aware of the opponent and what he's doing and where with peripheral vision, but actually looking up to watch him is even better. That allows you to quickly prepare for whatever he's doing. You should pick up the ball again just before he hits it, and then watch the ball the rest of the way - until it's time to look up again to see your opponent.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2883title: February 26, 2018 - Sound and Feetdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The Chinese know something about table tennis, and there's a stereotype about Chinese coaches that we can learn from. The stereotype is that in a group training session, they often walk around with their heads down as they do two things - listen to the sound of contact and watch your feet.They listen to the sound of contact because a good stroke and good timing result in a "good" contact sound. If the sound is wrong, then something else is wrong. By listening to the sound, they can identify there's a problem, and then look to see what the problem is. (So then they do have to look up. You don't want them to look up.)They watch your feet because the feet are the base of everything else. There's a reason nearly all table tennis drills are footwork drills - many coaches will sayalltable tennis drills are footwork drills. Get the feet right, and the rest follows somewhat naturally. Get the feet wrong, and all is lost.So get the sound and feet right, and you won't have to face the fury of all the problems they cause when done improperly. (I'd add one thing to this - if you get both thefeet and gripright, often everything in between falls into place. Get either wrong, and everything gets twisted in between.)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2877title: February 19, 2018 - Forehands and Backhands: 1-2-3, not 1-2date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most players practice their forehands and backhands with a 1-2 stroke: backswing, forward swing. But think about it - how often would you do this in a game? Answer -never!In a game, after finishing a stroke, you would return to aneutralposition, preparing for the next shot, since you don't know if it'll be forehand or backhand, or even what type of stroke it will be. So why would one practice doing a backswing immediately after finishing the forward swing part of a stroke?Instead, practice using a 1-2-3 stroke: backswing, forward swing, return to ready position. This is what you do in a game, and so this is what you should practice. There's also a little nuance here in that with the faulty 1-2 stroke, you backswing directly from a forward-swing position, when in reality the backswing should start from the neutral position - so practicing this wrong leads to bad technique and poor timing in games where you have to do it differently.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2872title: February 12, 2018 - Focus on Performance and Fun to Maximize Your Chances of Winningdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Do you think you have a better chance of winning if you focus on winning, thereby putting pressure on yourself for results, or by focusing on playing well, which maximizes your chances of actually winning? The question answers itself.You'll always play better and have a better end result if you focus on performance (i.e. playing well) rather than the end result. Performance in this case means all aspects of the game, including strokes, footwork, serve & receive, tactics, and the mental game.So how do you maximize performance, thereby maximizing your results? By practicing your techniques until they are second-nature, even in a big pressure match, and then approaching those matches where you don't increase the pressure by pressuring yourself to have good results.In other words, try to have fun when you play so there's less pressure, since it's that self-made pressure that causes one's game to fall apart. Practice your techniques, focus on performing well, have fun, and the results will eventually take care of themselves.Having fun doesn't mean laughing out loud. Have fun on the inside from the satisfaction of working hard and doing what you have practiced. If you focus on winning, you'll just put pressure on yourself and get nervous. Focus on performance, and smile on the inside.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2864title: February 5, 2018 - Speed and Power are Easy with Good Technique, but Good Technique is Difficultdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The above should be on a banner at every playing hall in the world. Players almost always try to drill at speeds or with power they can't control, thinking that by drilling that way, they'll learn to play at that pace. Superficially, it makes sense. But in reality, trying to play at a pace you can't control leads to sloppy, rushed technique, and poor balance, and so you are just reinforcing bad habits.Instead, drill at a pace that you can control, both with consistency and where you can keep the ball roughly where you are aiming, while staying balanced throughout. Focus on developing good technique, which is the difficult part to master. By going at a slower pace, you can reinforce and perfect that good technique until you can practically do it in your sleep, which should be your focus. Because if you develop good technique, you will be able to play with speed and power - see the title of this article.What you can and should do, when you are practicing at a pace you can control with at least decent technique and balance, is occasionally smash or rip a loop, just to test the shot. You'll find that with good technique, this is easy, as long as it isn't forced, i.e. you don't try to rush it when you are not ready for the shot. You can also work on playing at a faster pace in multiball or on a robot, where every ball comes out the same, and so you can increase your speed and power and still have control and consistency.Where did I learn this lesson? It comes from many decades of coaching experience, but it originally came from a specific incident back in my first year of play. At some big tournament I saw U.S. Men #1 Danny Seemiller (soon to be 5-time U.S. Men's Singles Champion) warming up by doing simple side-to-side forehand footwork at a nice, consistent pace with his practice partner and brother, Ricky Seemiller. I remember thinking to myself, "I can do that faster than he's doing it, and he's the best in the country?"Then I practiced it with someone, and of course I did do it faster than Danny - except I would hit maybe three raggedly rushed shots and miss, my shots were spraying all over the table to my partner's chagrin, and we couldn't have a good rally. Then I slowed down to a pace about the same as Danny and Ricky were doing, and suddenly I was consistent - everything came together, and my shots were fluid and consistent. I was hitting like Danny Seemiller!From there on I always did footwork and other drills only at a pace I could do consistently and comfortably, with good technique. Thisdoesn'tmean you don't push yourself, it means you push yourself at a pace you can do consistently.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2858title: January 29, 2018 - Playing the Crafty Veterandate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Suppose you have your opponent outgunned - you simply are the better player, shot for shot. And yet, somehow he's rated about the same as you. How is this possible and how do you beat him?Most likely he's a lot more experienced than you are, and almost by definition, he knows exactly what he does to play at your level, even with a weaker game. But that takes experience. So how to you beat the Crafty Veteran? Here are five tips.Don't let the Crafty Veteran do what he wants to do. Figure out what it is as early as possible, then do whatever you can to make sure he can't do it. If he likes to give you loaded pushes, perhaps serve topspin. (Or learn to spin those heavy pushes consistently.) If he likes to give you slow, spinny forehand loops, put the ball to his wide backhand. (Or learn how to counter-attack them.) If he wants to block you out of position, stay in position.Take your time and pick your shots. If you play too aggressively or try to force your shots, the Crafty Veteran will know when you are going to attack and will be able to choose what shots you get to attack. Instead, attack softer than usual until you have an easy put-away, and focusing on consistency and placement, since his goal is to make you inconsistent.Be flexible with your tactics. If you start winning, the Crafty Veteran will likely change tactics, and you have to as well.Stay focused. If you outplay the Crafty Veteran most of the time, but have one bad streak now and then, that's all he needs to win. If you win 60% of the points, but lose focus one time and lose three in a row, instead of leading 9-6, it's 9-all.Dominate with your game. If you have the better game, and follow the tips above, then you should be able to tactically force your game on the Crafty Veteran. Ultimately, this is the most important part, but you have to do the items above in order to do this. If you truly have the better game, you have winning tactical options, so figure them out.Finally, if you do lose to a Crafty Veteran, don't get angry; get even. You may have the better game, and yet somehow he won. Give him credit for finding a way to win, butmake sure you know how he won, and make sure it doesn't happen again.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2852title: January 22, 2018 - Doubles Signals and Why You Should Use Themdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When you serve in singles, you know what serve you are about to do, and so can be ready for the possible returns off that serve. Imagine playing where you had no idea what serve you did, and so couldn't prepare for the follow-up. Pretty awkward, right?That's what happens when you don't signal your serve to your partner in doubles. He has no idea if you are serving short backspin - and so must be ready for a push or flip; topspin, and so should be ready for a drive; or deep, and so must be ready for a loop.Sometimes the server's partner signals the serve. After all, he's the one who has to follow up, so many top doubles teams do that. Or if one of the players is more experienced than the other, then he might signal all the serves, whether he's serving or not.Sometimes you don't have to signal the serve; you can just discuss it quietly with your partner. But that can lead to stalling, so you have to limit that. Which is why you should have signals.Make sure to use serves that match your partner's game, not yours. If you aren't sure what types of serves he wants, ask him. The most common serving pattern in doubles is mixing in short backspin and no-spin serves (very low to the net), often toward the middle of the table to cut off the wide angle to the forehand. At lower levels, topspin serves and deep serves may work, but at higher levels they usually get attacked.There are different signaling systems, but here's the simplest, which I've used for over forty years. You do the signals under the table, so your partner can see it, but not your opponents.Backspin: point down with index finger.Topspin: point up with thumb or index finger.Sidespin: point sideways in the direction of the sidespin.Combinations, such as sidespin-backspin: point in both directions.No-spin: make a fist.Long serves: It's assumed in doubles that you will serve short, so the opponent can't loop, but if you are serving deep, point at the opponents.Some doubles teams even signal the direction of their receive (pointing under the table), so their partner can be ready. I don't normally do this as I often change the direction of my receive as I see the opponent's move, but I've had partners who do this, and it greatly helps me, especially since I'm always looking to attack with my forehand, and it makes it a lot easier to do so when you know where your partner's receive is going to be.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2847title: January 15, 2018 - Best Way to Learn – Watch, Mimic, Practicedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Often the best way to learn table tennis is to watch a top player and mimic what you see. Pick out someone whose game or strokes you like (or ask a coach to suggest someone to watch), and just watch how they do their shots. Then copy them by shadow-practicing (practicing your stroke without the ball) until you can the shot as well as that player . . . at least without the ball. Then find a coach or practice partner and practice the shot until youCANdo it as well as the player you were copying.Feel free to ask the player if you have any questions on how he does it. Most players are glad to help out – and since many top players spend many hours every day thinking about their game, they may be just dying to talk about it! You should also have a coach see how you are doing to really hone the technique.Try watching a top player just before you play a match. You'll be amazed at how much better you can do the shot in a game if you first watch someone else doing it really well. In table tennis, it's often monkey see, monkey do!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2843title: January 8, 2018 - Systematically Practice Against What You Have Trouble Withdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Often a player has trouble with something very specific, and yet only practices against it in actual games, where he only sees it now and then. This allows little chance of any type of systematic practice to develop the proper technique. The same player probably did lots of systematic practice to develop his main strokes – forehands, backhands, looping, serves, and so on. And yet, he doesn’t apply this to other aspects of his game.For example, if you have trouble with a specific serve, it should be your quest to find someone – a coach, top player, or practice partner – to do that serve against you over and Over and OVER until you are so proficient against it you never have trouble with it again.If you have trouble attacking heavy backspin, the same applies. Perhaps have someone feed heavy backspin in multiball so you can systematically work on your technique. Or do a drill where you serve backspin, partner pushes back heavy, and you attack. You’d want to do both of these, the multiball ball for more systematic practice, the latter because it’s more game-like.If you have trouble blocking spinny loops, such as the ones you get when you push with heavy backspin, then have someone serve and loop against your push as a systematic drill. In fact, to maximize practice, get a box of balls and don’t even play the point out – partner serves backspin, you push, partner loops, you block, and as you do so your partner is already grabbing the next ball.If you have a specific weakness against something, work out a drill so you can systematically practice against it until it is no longer a weakness. Or just play games, have fun, and spend the rest of your table tennis career with a fixable weakness that you’ve chosen not to fix.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2838title: January 1, 2018 - Elbow Drilldate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Playing the opponent’s middle – roughly where the playing elbow, the midpoint between forehand and backhand – is one of the more difficult tactics for players below the advanced level. It’s easier with the backhand, where the opponent’s right in front of you. But below the advanced level most players struggle with this. Instead, they tend to just play the corners. Here’s a simple drill where one player learns to attack the middle, and the other learns to defend against it.The drill is simple: Player A just serves topspin to Player B’s backhand, and they rally. But B’s job is to move the ball around to all three spots – wide corners and middle – with an emphasis on attacking the middle. A’s job is to simply return every ball to B’s backhand. Once you are comfortable with this drill, do the forehand variation, where Player A serves to Player B’s forehand, and returns every ball there.Player B should make minor adjustments when going after the middle. For example, some players cover the middle with their backhands, and so their true “middle” is a bit to the forehand side. And vice versa. Once B finds the opponent’s middle, he should put a big X on it and go after it every chance.When you do this drill, Player A will quickly see how difficult it is to respond effectively to a good shot at the middle. Player B will quickly see how much trouble Player A has with these shots. If they apply this to matches, both will improve.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2833title: December 11, 2017 - Push-Button Matches - Playing the Scary All-Out Attackerdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Ever have one of those matches where you felt like the opponent completely dominated with their attack and controlled everything, and yet you won? I call those “push-button” matches. In matches like that, the opponent basically attacks everything, no matter what you do. If their shots keep hitting, they win. Since there’s nothing you can do to stop them from attacking or counter-attacking, your job is to tactically make sure their attacks are low percentage. How do you do that? Here are ten guidelines.Try not to change your own game too much. You need to focus on quality shots, and your best chance of doing that is if you play your normal game, even if the opponent is trying to attack everything.Attack first. The best way to stop an opponent from attacking effectively is to attack first. This doesn’t mean going for wild shots or forcing an attack on balls you can’t make a good shot on. But it does mean looking for every chance to attack first, especially on your serve, and forcing the opponent to go for a wild counter-arrack. If he’ll push your serve back, then serve backspin (mixed with no-spin serves) and attack.Keep the ball deep. Most often when a player is counter-attacking consistently it’s because the shot he’s counter-attacking against isn’t going deep. Loops and drives that go deep on the table are much harder to attack than ones that land shorter.Vary the spin. In fact, use every spin, from heavy backspin to no-spin to heavy topspin. This will throw off the attacking opponent’s timing.Push effectively. You don’t need to make great pushes, but your long pushes should go pretty long, normally to the wide corners, with last-second changes of direction, and be low, heavy (or varied), and somewhat quick. If you do all of these pretty well, your push is hard to attack strongly. If you do all of these well except one, that’s the part that gives the opponent an easy attack.Rush them with your first shot. If they are quicker than you, then don’t try to take them on in a quickness battle. But for the first shot of the rally, perhaps an aggressive block, you should often be able to get in a quick short, and if well-placed (to a wide corner or at the elbow), it’ll force a lot of mistakes from the opponent.Place your shots. If the opponent is mostly a forehand attacker, go to the wide corners. If he attacks equally well from both sides, go at his elbow.If there’s a certain winning shot the opponent keeps making, then force him to make different winning shots. Don’t let him beat you with his best shot – make him beat you with his second or third best shots.Throw in some varied deep serves. If the opponent is overly aggressive, he’ll likely make mistakes if you serve, for example, fast no-spin at the elbow or wide backhand; big breaking sidespin serves to the wide backhand; or sudden fast down-the-line serves to the forehand.Don’t panic if the opponent makes a few great shots. Players who go for great shots over and over will tend to make a few great shots. It’s all about percentages – so make sure the percentages favor you as much as possible. Playing all-out attackers is psychologically tough, but if you stay focused and play smart, you will often win matches where you felt the other guy dominated every rally.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2826title: December 4, 2017 - How to Mess Up Your Opponent When Forced to Make a Weak Shotdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:No matter how much you train you will sometimes find yourself out of position and having to reach or lunge for a shot. It’s not something youwantto do; it’s something youhaveto do in those hopefully not-too-often situations. Most players understand the importance of trying to keep the ball at least low in these situations. But there’s a lot more you can do to win the point.Just getting the ball back weakly might work at the lowest levels, but it doesn’t work beyond that. Instead, you need to dosomethingto make the shot tricky for the opponent so that he doesn’t have an easy winner. Here are five ways to make the opponent uncomfortable. Some players will automatically argue that they are just trying to keep the ball in play and can’t do any of these, but that’s because they haven’ttriedand are still thinking like a beginner.Depth. By keeping the ball deep you keep the opponent farther away from his target (your side of the table) so that he’s more likely to miss, you give yourself more time to react to his shot, and you cut off the extreme angles the opponent can attack to. That’s a triple whammy.Angled placement. Even if you are reaching or lunging, you can aim your paddle to a wide corner, forcing your opponent to move and thereby increasing his chances of a mistake.Last-second change of direction. If you aim for one extreme angle, the opponent will likely move in that direction, and then, at the last second, you can go the other way, completely messing him up. Often this means aiming crosscourt, then going down the line.Spin. Even when lunging you can spin the ball. Putting a good topspin on the ball can be tricky for some, but even when reaching or lunging for the ball you can give the ball a good backspin. You can even put some sidespin on the ball. In some situations you can even let the ball drop below table level (where the opponent might not even see your contact) and sidespin the ball back, perhaps even faking the opposite sidespin after contact, which can catch the opponent off guard.Heavy no-spin. If you fake backspin but just meet the ball so it has little or no spin, you’ll be surprised how many players lift it right off the table.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2821title: November 27, 2017 - The Non-Playing Armdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players do not use their non-playing arm properly. Often the problem is that you can sort of get away with not using the non-playing arm in many drills – either static ones, where you aren’t moving (i.e. working on basics with beginners), and often in moving drills where you know where the ball is going and so don’t have to make sudden unexpected changes in direction. And so players will sometimes get lazy and let their non-playing arm just hang there like a dead snake. (I call it “dead snake syndrome.”)Often the consequences of a limp non-playing arm aren’t apparent as they affect your ability to recover from a shot – meaning it doesn’t so much affect the shot you are doing as much as it does thenextshot. And then, rather than blaming the slow recovery on the lack of balance and fixing the problem, they call out,“I’m too slow!”There are really three things about the non-playing arm you should focus on.Keep the arm and hand up in your ready position for balance, making it easier to make quick starts, using the arm as a counter-balance.It should be used as a counter-balance to your playing arm while rallying. This is especially true when making big forehand shots, but also true on big backhand shots if you turn sideways. It’s also used as a counter-balance when reaching in for short balls to the forehand.When making big forehand shots, where the body is rotating in roughly a circle, not only is your playing arm side moving forward, but the non-playing arm side should be moving backwards – so you should essentially be pulling back with that arm, adding to your power.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2817title: November 20, 2017 - Three Simple Side-to-Side Drillsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most table tennis movement is side-to-side, and so you need to practice this a lot. Here are three drills you should be doing - but only do the second when you are proficient with the first, and only do the third when you are proficient with the second. At all levels you should do all three, even the more basic first one - just do it faster and quicker. All three drills can be done either with a partner, where you return each shot to the same spot (partner's forehand or backhand - most often it's the backhand), or with a partner or coach feeding multiball.Drill One: Side to Side Forehand and Backhand.Your partner hits the ball side to side, alternating. Your focus is on consistency and strong shots. As you advance, take the ball quicker.Drill Two: Side to Side Random Forehand and Backhand, Two Spots. Your partner hits the ball randomly either to your forehand or backhand. Your focus is on reacting, not anticipating. Make sure your first move is the right move. Don't rush - you have more time then you think.Drill Three: Side to Side Random Whole Table. Your partner hits the ball randomly anywhere, focusing on going to the corners and middle (your playing elbow, roughly midway between forehand and backhand). Your focus is on reacting, not anticipating, while also covering shots to the middle.Make sure your first move is the right move.On shots to the middle favor your strongest shot, whether it's forehand or backhand, but make sure to move into position to do so.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2812title: November 13, 2017 - How to Play Doubles with a Much Stronger Playerdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:What are the best tactics when playing doubles with a much stronger player? This often happens in rating doubles. Many believe that a more balanced team has an advantage over a more lopsided team, but that's mostly true only if the balanced team is experienced playing together. In general, I have found that a lopsided teamthat plays smartgenerally is favored against a more balanced team. This is because they can play tactics that allow the stronger player to make more of the decisive shots.Tactically, there are five things the weaker player should focus on when playing. The key thing to remember is that your stronger partner will likely dominate, if given the chance, since he's stronger then the two more evenly matched opponents. So give him every chance to do so.Confidence. The weaker player is probably a bit intimidated, since his partner is much stronger, and he's the weakest player at the table. If his team loses, it's mostly because of his mistakes. However, this is the wrong way to look at it. Assuming this is a rated doubles event, then the only reason the strong player is eligible is because he's paired with a weaker player. So the thinking should be, "Without me, you can't even compete!" It's extremely important that the weaker player not be intimidated or he'll play poorly. His goal shouldn't be to outplay his partner or even his opponents, who are stronger players; his goal should be to play his level or better, and to playsmart.Serving. If the weaker player's serves are easily attacked, then he put his stronger partner on the defensive right from the start of the point. This is a double-whammy - a lopsided teamshould be at their absolute bestwhen the weaker player is serving, since this means the stronger player gets to make the first shot. If the weaker player’s serves allow the opponents to take the initiative, then it potentially puts them at their weakest. In the large majority of cases, the single most important thing here for the weaker player is to be able to serve low and short, with either backspin or no-spin. Ideally, he should practice in advance so he can serve short, low serves. If he does this, it stops the opposing team from making strong returns, and allows the stronger partner to dominate the point.This is the single most important thing a weaker player can do in preparation for playing doubles with a stronger player.Keep the ball in play with well-placed shots. Don't take your stronger partner out of play by constantly going for (and often missing) risky shots. If you are an attacking player, perhaps tone your attack down some for consistency. If you loop, focus on consistent loops, not trying to rip the ball. In general, try to keep the ball deep so your partner has time to react to the opponent's shots. In general, by keeping the ball in play without giving the opponent easy attacks or put-aways, you allow your stronger partner to dominate. And guess what? When he dominates, you get equal credit for giving him the opportunity to do so.Don't hesitate to end the point. This may seem contradictory to the idea of keeping the ball in play, but it is not. The stronger player will often force easy balls to put away, and the weaker player shouldn't hesitate to end the point when he gets one of these. The key is that he must focus on keeping the ball in play until he sees an easy put-away - and then unhesitatingly put it away.Get your strengths into play. Whatever your best shots are, if you don't use them, your level goes down. Therefore, you should work with your stronger partner to find chances to get your best shots into play. Sometimes this will contradict some of the above, so you have to find a balance.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2805title: November 6, 2017 - Become Your Own Feedbackdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:You should make it a habit to be aware of how you win and lose points. If you do this, it will become second nature, and you’ll have immediate feedback when you play on what you need to do to improve, both tactically (what you do in a given match) and strategically (how you develop your game).For example, are you aware of how likely you are to get the shot you are looking for with each of your main serves, and how likely you are to win the point with them? How often you win with each of your receives off of each of the opponent’s serves? How often you win with the various placements of each of your shots? What types of loops, blocks, pushes, and other shots work, and with what placements (including depth), spins, and speed? The questions are seemingly endless, but all you need to be aware of are the main ones in any given match.This doesn’t mean you rely completely on yourself all the time. You should also make it a habit after a match to sometimes ask opponents for their feedback, and have coaches or experienced players watch you play (or play you) and get feedback from them as well. In these cases, you are essentially getting feedback on your own feedback to see if it is accurate. You may find your own perceptions of what happens do not match what others see, or there might be something important that you are missing, and so you might have to re-evaluate your perceptions.Ultimately, when you win or lose a match, you should know why – including both what worked and didn’t work in both wins and losses – and know what you need to work on to improve, both tactically and strategically.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2799title: October 30, 2017 - How to Play the Bomber: The Player Who Tries to Blast Every Shotdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Have you ever had one of those matches where your opponent clobbered every ball past you, either looping or smashing? Where you spent more time chasing balls than actually hitting? Where you got a bad back just from bending over to pick them up? If you won the match, you probably didn't mind; there's nothing you can do about an opponent who clobbers (and misses) every shot.Unfortunately, every now and then you meet a player who clobbers ball after ball, and they keep hitting the table! This type of player also goes by the name 'National Champion' or 'U.S. Team Member' or even 'World Champion'. There's not much you can do when you play them. But what if he rips nearly every ball, and when the game is over, he's just barely won by making 51% of his shots? Some players will say, "There's nothing I could do; he just got hot." This response is usually from a player who will lose to this same player over and over because "he just got hot."Believe it or not, you can beat players like that, even if they get "hot." Here are four tactical ways of beating these players, who I will call from here on "The Bomber." (Note that the first two are generally the best ways.) You can:I. Keep them from attackingII. Make them miss their attacking shotsIII. Return their shotsIV.Match them, shot for shotYou will have to decide which methods will work best for you, based on what you do best. After all, if you are better at what you do than your opponent is at what he does (blasting the ball), then you should win.I. Keep them from attackingThere are two ways to keep a player from attacking. The first is to keep the ball short and low. Serve short, push short, and most players won't know what to do. Loopers can't loop short balls, and if you keep the ball low, hitters can't smash. Usually they will push the ball back, go for a wild shot or use a weak attacking shot. Of course, if they do push the ball, you have the option of either attacking or pushing yourself. If you can push, you're right back where you started from. So, whenever you are given the chance, attack!Which leads us to the second way to keep a player from attacking: attack first! You don't have to blast the ball – just a well-placed attack of any sort will make them do what they most want to avoid: defending. Loop or drive against deep pushes. Flip against short serves and pushes, and our Bomber opponent will get twisted up in knots. 'The "Bomber hates it when his opponent attacks.Of course, if they are like most all-out attackers, they'll probably go for a wild and crazy shot when you attack. An easy point for you. (Usually!)II. Make them miss their attacking shotsThe second way to beat The Bomber is to make him miss his shots. One way to do this is to attack first, as mentioned above, and force him to go for a difficult shot.Basically, to make a player miss a shot, you mix up the spins, speeds and placements. Keep the opponent off balance. If he hits in a winner on one shot, make the next shot different. Above all else, do not let The Bomber get into a rhythm! Throw everything at them: slow topspins mixed in with faster ones; angled off shots or hard drives to the middle; heavy backspin pushes with a no spin push suddenly thrown in; medium speed drives and then a faster, quicker one as a surprise; all are effective ways to force The Bomber into a mistake. Use your imagination in finding patterns that force The Bomber to short circuit.III. Return their shotsThe third way to beat The Bomber is to return his shots. Some may stare at these words in amazement: How can you return what you can't see?The solution is preparation and anticipation. This doesn't mean guessing where the opponent is going to hit the ball and waiting there. Even a dumb Bomber will then hit to another spot. It means watching your opponent, trying to tell where he is going on the next shot, and then the instant he is committed to the shot, moving to it.The key is moving neither too soon nor too late. Study players and learn when they are committed to a specific shot. That is when to move. Any earlier and the opponent will change directions. Any later and you won't have the maximum time to react to the shot.You may also be able to tell where a player is going with his shot even before he is committed. If a player has hit his put-away shot cross-court the last seventy three times, guess where the seventy-fourth is going to go? Don't move too soon and alert him to your intentions; just be ready to pounce on the ball when it goes where you expect it to go. Don't anticipate in advance except against a put-away shot, where you couldn't possibly react to it otherwise, and even then, don't move until the last possible instant. (Of course, top players can often react even to "put-away" shots, and so should anticipate even less.)If all else fails, and you still cannot react to the opponent's shot, try moving away from the table. It is best to stay near the table when possible but it is better to back up than give up the point. Lob, chop, make diving returns – whatever it takes to keep the ball in play. You'll be surprised how many easy shots The Bomber will miss. He's not used to having his shots returned, and one or two miraculous returns (but not so miraculous due to anticipation) will usually win the point.IV. Match them, shot for shot – but SmarterThe final way to beat The Bomber is to match him shot for shot. This is not recommended for the fainthearted. This means that you yourself are a Bomber merely looking for a better way to bomb. Well, there is nothing wrong with being a Bomber. It's like being a football player. The stereotype is that of being a dumb jock, but this isn't true, at least in your case. (Or you wouldn't be able to read this!) And there are few things scarier than a Smart Bomber.Basically, a Smart Bomber knows that the winner between two Bombers is the one who bombs the most and the best. So he will be looking for as many shots to put away as possible, while not giving any to his opponent. This gets us back to the part covered earlier on attacking first. It really all comes down to serve and receive.The Smart Bomber serves mostly short and either pushes serves back short or places his flips and long push receives. The Dumb Bomber often does serve short but rarely returns serves short and so is constantly handicapped. The result is the Smart Bomber attacks first and, when the match is over, he is victorious. Of course, he still can't win, since all the spectators saw was a bunch of wild attackers, being Dumb Spectators. And so the Smart Bomber wins the tournament but contributes to the stereotypes of the Dumb Bomber. Oh well.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2793title: October 23, 2017 - Top Sixteen Reasons Players Don’t Improvedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:I really tried narrowing this down, but this could just as easily have been a Top 50 list. As with past lists, these are not necessarily in order of importance.Bad technique.Deep down they don’t believe they can play at a higher level and so continue to only play shots at their current level.They keep practicing the same things rather than work on what’s keeping them from improving.They don’t useSaturation Trainingto fix weaknesses.They don’t knowThe Book on Your Game.They don’t develop goodthird-ball attack servesto improve their attack.They don’t make it a habit to serve and attack.They don’t work with a coach and practice partner regularly.They focus on power instead of consistency and placement.They don’t develop their game tactically (what to do in a given match) and strategically (developing your game for the future).They don’tdevelop an overpowering strengththat opponents will fear.They don’t make moving their feet a habit.They don’t analyze their wins and losses to see what works and what doesn’t.They don’t follow theSeven Habits of Highly Effective Table Tennis Players.They aren’tperfectionists.They don’t knowHow to Move Up a Level.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2790title: October 16, 2017 - Top Twelve Tactical Rallying Mistakesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Playing too much into the backhand.Not attacking the middle (roughly the playing elbow, midway between forehand and backhand), and using this to set up a follow-up attack to the corners or middle again.Not attacking all three spots – wide corners and middle.Attacking to a corner when you have an angle to attack outside the corner.Looking for a chance to counter-attack to an opponent’s forehand rather than just making the first attack there.Not changing the pace.Not sometimes aiming one way, and at the last second going another.Not keeping the ball deep (unless going for a change-of-pace or drop shot).Trying to end the point too quickly.Not ending the point when the shot is there.Not finishing a shot by following through into position for the next shot.Attacking an opponent’s weak side first rather than first attacking their stronger side so that you can follow by attacking their weaker side while also having to move.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2781title: October 9, 2017 – Top Ten Tactical Receiving Mistakesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Too predictable. Vary your receive! Most of the below are variations on this.Giving the server what he wants.Too aggressive. If you attack every serve it becomes predictable.Too passive. If you never attack the serve, then the server knows he can serve and attack every time. (If he’s smart, he’ll vary his attack.)Passive against deep serves. You can’t really rush or angle the server against a deep serve, so you need to be aggressive.No variation to pushes. Need to vary them to throw off the server.No short push variation. Opponent knows your return will go long and so can hang back.Long pushes aren’t quick, low, heavy, deep, and at wide angles.No last-second changes of direction. So server can see where you are returning the ball very early.Unable tobackhand banana flipagainst short serves, the biggest development in technique in recent times – get with the program!!! (Here’s my Tip of the Week,Backhand Banana Flip.)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2776title: October 2, 2017 - Top Ten Tactical Serving Mistakesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Not enough variation.Serving to the backhand over and Over and OVER.Always serving from the same spot, usually from the backhand corner.Not serving with a purpose.Always serving with heavy spin, without using no-spin as a variation (where you fake heavy spin – “heavy no-spin”).Telegraphing your serves by how you set up or start your motion.Too often serving long to loopers or short to quick players.Not trying out all your main serves early on to find out what works.Saving your trickiest serves for when it’s close, instead of using them early so it doesn’t get close, and then using them again as needed.Not understanding the basic concept that you should essentially ALWAYS serve and attack UNLESS the receiver does something to stop you from doing so.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2770title: September 25, 2017 - Assume You Have to Movedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players go through this series of events as the opponent is hitting the ball toward them:Opponent begins forward swing.I wait to see where the ball is going.Opponent hits ball.The ball is coming toward me.Do I have to move?Yes, I have to move!I prepare to move.I move.More advanced players go through this series of events:I prepare to move.Opponent begins forward swing.From forward swing I see where the ball is going.I move.Which do you think is more efficient? The two most important things from this are that you should get into the habit of trying to react to where the opponent is hitting the ball as he begins his forward swing, and that you shouldassumeyou have to move.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2764title: September 18, 2017 - Always Think of a Loop as a Set-up Shotdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players, when they get a chance to loop hard, think of it as a put-away shot. And often it is. However, this can cause problems since sometimes they do come back, especially when you face stronger players. There’s a simple way of looking at it. If it doesn’t come back, you don’t have to worry about it, so assume it will come back, and prepare for that. So always think of a loop as a set-up shot for thenextshot, which is where you might look to put the ball away – and that shot, while often a put-away, should also be thought of as a set-up shot. This doesn’t mean you don’t try to loop a weak ball with enough speed and placement (that’s key) to end the point, but after you loop it away, you shouldexpectit to come back, and be ready to follow up.Here’s a good exercise. When you play a practice match, when you see a ball you can loop away, take 10% off your speed, but focus 100% on placement – often to the middle (playing elbow, midway between forehand and backhand), or a wide angle if it’s open, where you try to win the point or force a weak return because of the placement. The opponent will have to move out of position to return the shot, and if he does return it – assume he will! – then you end the point to the part of the table he either left open, or leaves open in attempting to cover the part he left open. Or just go at the middle again.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2759title: September 11, 2017 - Make Adjusting a Habit by Playing Different Playersdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most players understand that you need to play many different styles to learn how to play against them. Otherwise, when you face them in a match, you will struggle with them. And so smart players make sure to play against a variety of styles, and learn how to play each of the main ones.However, many players mistake playing different styles with playing different players. Let’s suppose you spend the large bulk of your playing time at your club playing against ten other players, most of them probably around your level. You might be playing against a decent range of playing styles, though probably not all. However, since you are playing mostly against the same players, week after week, month after month, even year after year, while you become very familiar and good against those players, there’s one huge thing you arenotdoing – and that’s making it a habit to adjust to different players.It’s not enough to just play against different styles, though that’s a big part of it. If you play mostly the same players all the time, then aren’t regularly adjusting to new players. And so when you do have to adjust to a new player, it’s much more difficult to do then if you were playing different players regularly, in which you are constantly adjusting your game to players you rarely or never play, and so it becomes a habit.There are really two types of adjusting. One is adjusting your strokes against different players. This is somewhat obvious. If you play in a tournament and your opponent uses long pips in a way you are not used to, or has a loop that’s different from the players you are used to playing against, or hits his shots flatter, or has a weird push, or has a different serve, or something else –everyonehas something unique in their game – you have to adjust your strokes to these differences. If you are not used to playing different players regularly, you will likely struggle making the adjustment since adjusting your strokes to new players is not something you are used to doing. And so you struggle. Perhaps you eventually make the adjustment, but it’s also likely that you lose the match, and come off the table still uncomfortable with whatever it was the opponent did differently.This type of adjustment isn’t subtle, and most players understand that they need to adjust their strokes against different opponents, even if they often go right back to playing the same group of players all the time. They at least understand the problem, and perhaps will make some attempt to fix it by looking to play different players. If they do this enough, they might develop the habit of adjusting their strokes to new opponents.But as noted above, there is a second type of adjusting – tactical. This is more subtle. If you struggle to adjust your strokes to an opponent, it’s obvious. But if you aren’t used to adjusting your tactics to new opponents – which you develop by playing new opponents regularly – then you likely will not even realize it afterwards. You may have adjusted your strokes perfectly and felt comfortable out there, but still lost because, unknowingly, you aren’t used to adjusting your tactics to different opponents, and so play them as if they were one of the players you are used to playing.I’m going to use my own game as an example here. During my prime years I had a very steady game – in fact, from my backhand corner to my wide forehand I had a brick wall defense that few could get through. Many opponents would have great rallies with me, but were unable to get through that steadiness. (I was primarily a forehand attacker, but once an opponent attacked I’d fall back on mostly blocking and countering.) What only a few smart opponents figured out was that while I was steady, I struggled with one type of attack – into my wide backhand, outside the corner. Those who played me regularly, and those that were used to adjusting to new opponents, figured out that when attacking against me, the goal was to get a ball that landed a little short, and then attack that ball just outside the corner on my backhand side. But since most tournament opponents did not play me regularly and were not good at adjusting tactically, most didn’t figure this out, and so when they got that slightly short ball, they’d continue to attack the corners and my middle (elbow), and I’d be a brick wall – but only because they failed to adjust by going after that huge hole off to the side of that brick wall.While I’m on the topic of using my game as an example, I’m still amazed at how many opponents never figured out how strong I was forehand looping against forehand pendulum serves, while I struggled with the opposite type of sidespin (backhand, tomahawk, and reverse pendulum serves) – and so they’d continue to give me a steady diet of forehand pendulum serves to the point where I’d sometimes hold back just to encourage them to keep giving me those serves. (Thank you!) In both cases given here, my opponents usually were not in the habit of adjusting tactically to new players, and so they didn’t adjust tactically.The root of the problem of not adjusting your strokes and tactics to new players is not regularly playing new players, which is where you develop the habit of making this adjustment. However, the latter – developing the habit of adjusting your tactics to new players – is a bit more subtle and insidious, as while the former pretty much you slaps you in the face if you don’t adjust, the latter does not.The cure to all of this, of course, is to seek out new players, at your club, at different clubs, in leagues, and in tournaments. If this means playing against weaker players just so you can play someone different, then do so – everyone brings something different to the table that you can practice against.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2754title: September 4, 2017 - Weapons to Allow Opponents to Beat Themselvesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most players, especially in their developmental years, spend huge amounts of time developing direct weapons for winning – serves, footwork, and of course a big forehand or backhand. Or perhaps something more subtle, like a steady aggressive backhand, quick blocking, or steady looping that wears down an opponent. These are all direct weapons for beating an opponent.But experienced players also develop weapons that allow an opponent to beat himself. For example, suppose your opponent likes to attack with his forehand from the backhand corner. You could attack yourself, thereby making his attack more difficult and the match might turn into a bashing contest. And most of the time a strong attack does win. However, you should also sometimes do something simple and yet high-percentage to win the point with less risk, especially when the opponent is serving. In the example here, perhaps just aim to his backhand side, and then at the last second – as the opponent begins to step around – change directions and do a simple push or block to the wide forehand.There are many ways of allowing an opponent to beat himself. If he loops very fast all the time, he has little margin for error, so all you might have to do is vary the amount of spin on your push, and watch him miss as you go from light or no-spin to super-heavy backspin. Or change your contact point, sometimes taking the ball later, other times quicker, to throw off his timing. (A quick push can especially rush an opponent and create “unforced” errors.) If your opponent constantly counter-attacks, then simply vary your own shots dramatically so he can’t get his timing, and watch him beat himself as he misses against your barrage of varied pushes, blocks, and loops.  If he’s strong on both wings, rather than feed those powerful wings you might simple go to at least somewhat aggressively to his middle, and watch his shots struggle, plus put him out of position for the next shot. And, of course, if he’s over-aggressive on receive, give him a barrage of varied serves.There are many ways of allowing an opponent to beat himself, but you can only learn them by trying different things out and seeing what works. It comes with experience, but only if you experiment.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2746title: August 28, 2017 - Covering the Wide Anglesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most players have trouble when an opponent attacks at a wide angle, whether it’s to the forehand or backhand. Here are five principles to help you cover them.Position yourself from the previous shot. That means if you put the ball to, say, the opponent’s wide forehand, he has an angle into your forehand. So you have to position yourself toward that side so you can cover it.Step to the ball. Many players lean or reach, but this greatly limits your range as well as the ability to make a good shot.Move in to block. Many players move sideways to cover the wide angles, which allows the ball to move away from you. Instead, move sideways and in and cut the ball off before it can get away from the table.Angle back. If the opponent angles you, he gives you the same or greater counter-angle. If he moves to cover it too much, you can catch him off guard by going down the line.Position yourself again. After moving wide to cover an angled shot, you need to get back into position quickly or risk leaving the table open. If you counter-angled back, then you don’t have to move too much as you need to cover his potential angled return – essentially a counter-counter-angle.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2740title: August 21, 2017 - Fourth-Ball Backhand Loop Attackdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the most valuable times to have a good backhand loop is when receiving – but not necessarily for the receive itself. It can also be a good backhand drive against backspin, especially for some older players and those with non-inverted surfaces, but an ability to attack backspin with the backhand is key to the fourth-ball attack. There are two basic ways of setting this up when receiving against a backspin serve. (Fourth-ball attack means you attack the fourth ball – serve, receive, server’s first shot, receiver’s second shot, which is the fourth ball.)The first is to aggressively push the serve back - right off the bounce, heavy, low, deep, and angled into the server’s backhand. This will often catch the server off guard, leading to a push return, usually crosscourt right back to your backhand. And you are just standing there, waiting for it, with your backhand loop at the ready! Of course, the server may still attack this push, but it’ll likely be a weak or erratic attack, so be ready for that as well. But against many players, you’ll get to fourth-ball backhand attack.The second is to push the serve back short. Since the server is likely hanging back, looking to attack a deep return, a short push can catch him off guard. What’s his most likely response? He’ll likely push it back, and often deep. Again, he’ll likely push it to your backhand, and you’ll be waiting with your backhand loop at the ready!No tactic is perfect. In the first case above, the serve may still make a strong, consistent loop against your push. In the second case, he might push your short push back short, or flip it. If so, you change your tactics. But against many or most players, one of these tactics will often set you up for that backhand attack. If it doesn’t, before changing tactics you need to make sure you are doing it correctly – pushing aggressively in the first case, and pushing short (and low!) in the second.Plus, none of this works if you can’t attack the push to the backhand, so practice that until you can do it against any long push. Older players often prefer backhand drives, but against a push, it’s surprisingly easy to develop a decent backhand loop at any age, so give it a try. (To be clear, loops are heavy topspin; drives are light topspin.) Make sure to place the backhand attack – players go crosscourt way too often when it’s usually more effective to attack the opponent’s middle (elbow) or wide forehand.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2734title: August 14, 2017 - Attacking the Middle with the Forehand and Backhanddate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players are effective at attacking an opponent’s middle with their backhands. (The middle is roughly the opponent’s elbow, the mid-point between forehand and backhand, which is usually the most awkward shot to react to.) This is because as they are lining up the shot, the opponent is in clear view. However, on the forehand, you turn sideways, and so lose sight of the opponent.Top coaches often say that you have to learn to attack the opponent’s elbow early on to make it instinctive. Otherwise, it’s very difficult to develop this as a successful habit. However, I believe this is true more of the forehand than the backhand, and many players do learn to attack the middle with the backhand. So what can one do to learn to do so with the forehand?The answer, unsurprisingly, is to practice it. The problem is that most players either don’t think about it much when playing games and so don’t develop it, or if they do try it, it’s not often enough to develop it as a habit. And so in game situations, either they simply don’t do go for the middle, or when they do, they miss this moving target, and instead give the opponent an easy forehand or backhand. So to learn to attack the middle with your forehand, you need to do it not just in games, but in drills.The first step is to simply learn to hit there. Most players drill to the forehand or backhand corners, and so instinctively go there in games. To make a habit of going to the middle, do drills where your opponent literally sets up to play his backhand (or forehand) from where his elbow would normally be. For a righty in a typical ready position, this would normally be just to the left of the middle line.  So do drills where you hit to that spot to make it a habit.But the middle is a moving target – your opponent isn’t always in the same spot. His ready position should move relative to where you are hitting the ball from. So his middle is in a different location depending on whether you are hitting the ball from the wide backhand, wide forehand, or any area between. So you need to do free-play drills where you focus on going after the middle. For example, do serve and attack drills where you go after the middle relentlessly. If the opponent tries to cover for it, you simply move your target to where his new middle is. If he does to play one-winged, perhaps covering the entire middle area with his forehand or backhand, then you might go to the open corner just to keep things honest, forcing him to go back to a more normal ready position.If you don’t already attack the opponent’s middle with your backhand, then start developing that habit – it’s relatively easy since you can see your target in front of you, and line up your racket, ball, and the opponent’s middle. But you really need to do this with the forehand as well, so develop that as well with some systematic practice - and turn your forehand into an even more formidable weapon!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2728title: August 7, 2017 - Feet Parallel to Table is Usually a Backhand Stancedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Suppose you are a righty playing a righty, or a lefty playing a lefty. (That’s something like 85-90% of the time.) Suppose your opponent serves from his backhand corner, as the large majority of players do, and the rally starts out backhand to backhand in some fashion, as often is the case (since players don’t want to give the other guy an easy forehand, which is usually more powerful). What is a good ready stance here? Many think a neutral stance means standing with their feet parallel to the end-line. But if you do that, you are basically facing the opponent’s forehand side. An actual neutral stance would involve you facing the opponent, with your feet parallel to him – meaning your right foot would be slightly back.This keeps coming up as I see beginning/intermediate students and other players who think they are in a neutral stance, and aren’t ready to forehand attack when they get the chance because of this stance. They are actually in a backhand stance, and so can only effectively attack with their backhand. Even against pushes toward their forehand side they end up pushing with their backhands.So what would be a truly neutral stance? That would be with your feet roughly parallel to wherever your opponent’s expected contact point would be on his next shot. Make it a habit to face your opponent so that your feet naturally fall into this position.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2722title: July 31, 2017 - Killer Practice Sessionsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:So you've decided you want to beat the neighborhood or club champ, and move up to the next level. Then you're going to have to practice. You know – go out to the table with another person who's also tired of losing, and do practice drills (not just games) to improve your game. There are a number of factors you should consider to maximize your time. First off, everybody should not be doing the same drills. What drills you should do depend on:The playing level of you and your practice partnerThe playing style & equipment of you and your practice partnerThe frequency & duration of your practice sessionsThe Playing Level of You and Your Practice PartnerObviously, if you're just starting out, you won't be working too much on your inside-out loop off the bounce. On the other hand, you won't see the world champion hitting forehand to forehand much except as part of a short warm-up. So choose drills that are appropriate to your level. Focus on consistency and proper form. Move your feet to every shot and return to ready position. Get the fundamentals down so you will be "good enough" to do advanced drills with shots you can actually do in a match consistently. Without the fundamentals, your game will always be fundamentally flawed, and it will be difficult to improve.Playing Styles & Equipment of You and Your Practice PartnerThe playing style of you and your partner also affects what drills you will be doing. If your partner has long pips on his backhand, don't expect to practice rapid-fire backhand to backhand type drills. If one player is primarily a looper, the other a hitter, then each will be doing different style drills. So you have to make allowances for all of this. Take advantage of your partner's style to practice drills against that particular style. To become a well rounded player try to practice against a wide variety of styles, especially prior to tournaments.The Frequency and Duration of Your Practice SessionsIf you only practice occasionally, you should pick your drills with great care. There are two "theories" as to how to choose drills for an occasional practice session. You can either choose specific parts of your game that need work, and focus on that; or you can do a general session, working on your most common shots. Here's our recommendation: choose a couple of things that you really need work on; choose a couple of things that you do really well, and want to tune up; and work these items into a general practice session that covers as many of the techniques that you use in a match as possible.Of course, if you practice regularly, you'll get the best of both worlds.Choosing the Drills for Your Practice SessionThere are many possible models for a practice session. What we are going to do is design a general session that you can use as a model for yourself. Each part of the practice session developed below is divided into beginning, intermediate and advanced drills. The level designation does not refer strictly to your overall level of play, however. Take into account how well you do the technique being practiced. For example, a player with a good loop may do more advanced looping drills than a stronger player whose loop is not as good. Using the USATT's rating system, a very rough idea of these levels might be up to 1300 for beginner level, from 1300-1800 for intermediate, and 1800+ for advanced.When you read the drills below, it is important to remember that the drills are not carved in stone. For example, if a drill calls for you to hit the ball to your partner's backhand, you can change the drill and hit to his forehand instead. This is simply how one session and set of drills could go. When we say to hit a particular shot with, say, a forehand, that means either a forehand drive or a forehand loop, depending on your playing style. (The drills assume both players are right-handed; left-handers should adjust accordingly.)As you get better with some drills, you should make them more like a match. For example, when doing a side-to-side footwork drill, instead of starting off with a topspin serve and getting right into the drill, start off the drill with a backspin serve, have your partner push it back, and loop the first ball. Your partner would block it back, and you'd then continue the drill as a footwork drill. Or you might start a drill with a sidespin serve, with the receiver topspinning it back, and then go into the footwork drill. In most of the drills listed here, this type of drill is not listed or the listings would simply get too long and complicated. We leave it to you to incorporate this into some of the drills below – but only after you are consistent with the drill as it is.A typical practice session might be broken down into the following eight parts. Missing any part is like missing a link in a chain, so incorporate all parts in your session in some way.Warm up/stroking drillsFootwork drillsAttack drillsBreakServe & Receive drillsSpecialized drillsMatch playSolo practiceWarm Up/Stroking Drills:This is where you warm up the muscles and tune up the basic shots. Beginners need to do more basic stroking drills, such as forehand to forehand and backhand to backhand, to develop the strokes and the timing. As players get more advanced, more advanced techniques should be incorporated into the warm-up, such as looping or footwork practice (which overlaps the next part of the practice session).BeginnersForehand-to-forehand, crosscourt, or forehand to backhand, down the line, 7.5 minutesBackhand-to-backhand, crosscourt, or forehand to backhand, down the line, 7.5 minutesBackhand-to-backhand pushing, 5 minutesForehand-to-forehand pushing, 5 minutesOptional drill:See how many forehands and backhands you can hit in a row. Try for 100 or more.IntermediateForehand-to-forehand, crosscourt, 2.5 minutesBackhand-to-backhand, crosscourt, 2.5 minutesForehand-to-backhand, down the line, 2.5 minutesBackhand-to-forehand, down the line, 2.5 minutesForehand loop against block, 5 minutes eachOptional drills:Pushing all over table, all types of pushesBackhand loop against blockCounterloopingAdvancedForehand-to-forehand crosscourt or forehand to backhand down the line, 2.5 minutesBackhand-to-backhand, crosscourt or backhand-to-forehand, down the line, 2.5 minutesForehand loop against block, partner moves you around, 5 minutes eachptional drills:Backhand loop against blockCounterloopingPushing all over table, all types of pushesFootwork drills:BeginnersAlternate forehand and backhand shots. You hit all shots to one place on partner's side, either the forehand or backhand side. Partner alternates hitting to your forehand and backhand corners. 5 minutes eachSide-to-side forehand footwork, all forehands against partner's backhand block to your forehand and backhand courts, 5 minutes eachOptional drill:Figure 8 footwork, you hit every shot crosscourt while your partner hits every shot down the line, 5 minutes each then change directionIntermediateSide-to-side footwork drill, 2/3 table covered, 7.5 minutes eachPartner randomly hits ball either to your forehand or backhand side; you stroke each ball back to the same spot. 5 minutes eachOptional drills:See Falkenberg drill under "advanced."Figure 8 FH footwork – server goes crosscourt, receiver goes down the line with both players only using forehands. 10 minutes total.AdvancedSide-to-side footwork drill, fast, 2/3 to full table covered, 5 minutes each2-1 drill (also called Falkenberg drill): You hit all balls to your partner's backhand. He hits two to your backhand, one to your forehand, then repeats. You return first shot with your backhand, step around and hit next with your forehand, then return the next shot (to your wide forehand) with your forehand. 5 minutes eachRandom footwork. Partner hits balls to all parts of the table randomly; you stroke each ball back to the same spot. 5 minutes eachOptional drill:Serve backspin; partner pushes to your wide backhand; you step around and loop with your forehand to your partner's forehand; he quick-blocks crosscourt to your wide forehand; play out the point.Attack drills:BeginningServe backspin; partner pushes ball back to specified part of table; you loop, and play out the point. 7.5 minutes each.Optional drill:Serve fast & deep to partner's wide backhand, follow up with aggressive forehand or backhand hit or smashIntermediateServe short backspin; partner pushes ball back to specified part of table; you loop, and play out the point. 5 minutes eachServe short backspin; partner pushes ball back randomly anywhere; you loop (forehand from forehand side, backhand from backhand side), and play out the point. 5 minutes each.Optional drill:Serve fast & deep anywhere on the table, follow up with a loopAdvancedServe short backspin; partner pushes ball back randomly anywhere; you loop (forehand from forehand side, forehand or backhand from backhand side), and play out the point. 7.5 minutes each.Optional drills:Server has option of an occasional sudden fast & deep serve to mix things up. Or receiver has option of attacking the serve occasionally. There are many ways of varying this drill.Serve short sidespin to partner's forehand. Partner flips serve to wide angle. You loop or hit, and play out point.Break(5 minutes?)Serve & Receive drills:BeginningPractice any serve, at least one minute for each serve. This way you not only get to practice and develop the serve, but your partner (and then yourself) gets to practice receiving it. 7.5 minutes eachIntermediatePractice serve and attack. Server can use any serve, but must follow up aggressively. Receiver may attack any deep serves, but should emphasize control. Alternate drill: Server serves one type of serve over and over, receiver is given two options for receive. Server must prepare for both. 7.5 minutes eachAdvancedAt this point, serve and receive drills get complicated. Advanced players should pick any serve & receive pattern, and practice it. For example, consider all the possible patterns starting with the server serving short backspin, topspin, no-spin, or sidespin. Receiver can push long or short or flip to either side or to the middle. In most drills, receiver should have two possible options, and server must prepare for both.Specialized drills:At this point, drills becomes too personalized to really plan a session without knowing the players. However, here are some of the things you might want to practice, depending on the styles, levels, weaknesses and strengths of you and your partner. Choose two drills, and each player gets 7.5 minutes for each drill.Backhand loop (this can also be done during warm-up).Loop/chop drill. Drill is done either all crosscourt or all down the line. You loop; partner blocks; you chop; partner pushes; you loop, and drill repeats. This is especially good for developing the backhand loop versus backspin.Hitting or smashing against blockLobbing or choppingLooping against a chopperCounterloopingAny of an infinite number of serve & receive drills.Match play:Regardless of your level, you need match practice to try out what you do in practice. All the practice on a technique is pointless if you aren't able to do it in a game situation! So most practice sessions end with a practice match.One way to make the practice match even better is to assign "styles" to the players. For example, one player may be designated the aggressor in one game, while the other plays a mostly steady blocking or counter-driving game (but attacking when the shot is there). Or one player may try pushing and blocking one game, while other player plays mostly looping.If you and your partner are not really the same level, you might play games with the stronger player spotting points. Each game the spot changes by one, depending on who won the previous game. Playing deuce games can also be very helpful.Solo Practice:There are three types of practice you can do by yourself, outside your regular practice session.First, there isserve practice. Although there were a serve/receive drills in the session designed here, this isn't enough. You really need to find the time to practice your serves, perhaps twice a week for 15-20 minutes – more, if you really want to be good!Second, if you really want to improve to a high level, you should do somephysical training. Jumping rope, wind sprints, distance running, pushups, sit-ups and weight training are all excellent physical training for table tennis. You use nearly the entire body for table tennis, so you need to train nearly the entire body. Stretching is also valuable in that it prevents injuries, shortens recovery time between training sessions, and general flexibility helps you play better.Lastly, learn something aboutmental training.Here are some great resources.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2716title: July 17, 2017 - Sports Psychologydate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Sports psychology, along with return of serve, are the two things in table tennis that nearly everyone has trouble with and yet few do anything about. How often have you lamented that you don’t play as well in tournaments as you do in practice matches? Found yourself nervous and unable to play your best? Been on the verge of winning a match and then got nervous and blew it?Stroking and footwork drills aren’t going to solve these problems. You need to address what’s really going on. In theSports Psychology sectionof TableTennisCoaching.com there are numerous links that should help. They include links to lots of articles and to five books that I recommend. (All five books are relatively short, quick reads.)ARTICLES ON SPORTS PSYCHOLOGYSports Psychology Articlesby Larry Hodges (18)Dora Kurimay's Table Tennis Sports Psychology page- Strongly recommended! See also her book below.United States Olympic Committee Sports PsychologyThe Ultimate Guide to Table Tennis Psychologyfrom Expert Table TennisBOOKS ON SPORTS PSYCHOLOGY?Get Your Game Face On Like the Pros!by Dora Kurimay and Kathy Toon;here’s my review.The Inner Game of Tennisby W. Timothy GallweyWith Winning in Mindby Lanny BasshamWinning Uglyby Brad GilbertFinding Your Zoneby Michael Lardon, M.D.;here’s my review(see second segment)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2710title: July 10, 2017 - Learn Control First on Receivedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:In this age of thebanana flip, where no serve is so low or spinny that it can't be attacked, players often neglect to learn the most important part about receive - ball control. This means the ability to read the serve and return it consistently anywhere on the table without trying to kill it.Instead, many players blindly attack every serve, often erratically. This is generally the right thing to do against deep serves as long as the attacks are consistent and well-placed loops (or for some, drives), not just loop kills. But against short serves, where you can both rush, angle, and short-ball your opponent, many players jump right to the banana flip, attacking everything like the world-class players often do. (Though world-class players don't attack every short serve - they still push short and even long as a variation.) Attacking the serve may seem the "cool" thing to do, but doing it every time makes you predictable as well as erratic, since you do it even against serves that are difficult to attack, but easy to return effectively in other ways.For example, if a server mixes his serves up very well, and occasionally throws a very heavy, very low short backspin serve, it can be difficult to flip since you have to adjust to so many different spins. Why not perhaps half the time or more just push it short, or perhaps an aggressive deep push? If you aren't comfortable doing that, that's the whole point - you haven't developed the ball control part of your game, which includes both pushing short and long, and controlling the next shot if the opponent attacks.Against short serves, the most important thing to learn is ball control. Learn to flip, yes, but also learn to push short or long (against backspin or no-spin). If you flip every time, the opponent knows it's coming and can just wait for it. Why make it so easy and predictable for him? The primary goal of the receive isn't to win the point; it's to neutralize the serve. If you do that, and force neutral rallies that way and win half the points, then you should be able to win the match on your own serve. Especially if your opponent is erratically and predictably trying to flip all your short serves!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2704title: June 26, 2017 - One Point at a Timedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most players think in terms of the score of the current game, or the game score of the current match. This puts tremendous unneeded pressure on the player. Instead, learn to focus on one point at a time, no matter the score. Jan-Ove Waldner, often called the greatest player of all time, once said that it was his ability to ignore everything except the next point that allowed him to play so well under pressure. Tactically, there are times when you may think ahead, such as deciding what two serves used in succession might best mess up an opponent. But other than that, only play and think one point at a time. Once that point is done, continue the same way with the next point – and you may be surprised how much easier and more relaxing this is!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2699title: June 19, 2017 - Importance of Routinedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Watch almost any top player a number of times just before he serves and you’ll notice something interesting – they go through the same routine each time. It’s part of mental rehearsal, which is what primes the brain (read – subconscious) for what’s about to happen. It’s almost like the famous Pavlov dog experiments, where they’d ring a bell just before feeding the dogs, and eventually the dogs would salivate at the sound of the bell. If you have a set routine for something, it similarly primes you for what you are about to do.Let’s look at the top two players in the world, Ma Long and Fan Zhendong, who recently played in the Men’s Final at the 2017 Worlds, with Ma Long winning, deuce in the seventh. We often watch truncated versions, where time between points is taken out, so never see what happens just before. Here’s the link to thestart of the full match, 2:50 into the video.Fan is serving at 0-0 in game one. What does he do here before this first serve, and repeatedly throughout the match when he serves? In rapid succession, he bounces the ball twice on the table, stops, bounces it two more times, stops, then bounces it two more times, and then he’s primed to play. I didn’t watch every point for this, only about ten, and he did this every time. (One time he bounced it three times, stopped as if realizing his error, and then did the six-bounce routine.)Now watch when Ma Long serves. It’s a bit more subtle, but watch as he sets up to serve. He stretches out, holding the ball just over the middle line – and comes to a stop, holding the ball with his handupside-down. You can see him focusing, and then he turns his hand over so the ball rests freely on the palm, and he’s primed to play.In both cases, at some point they come to a stop, and while still, they are visualizing the serve they are about to do.I have my own routine, which I’ve been doing before I serve for nearly 40 years. I give my right sleeve a tug with my left arm, then step to the table. As I step in, I drop my playing arm and pull it back and then forward, like a pendulum. I finish in my serving position, bounce the ball on the table one time, and I’m primed to play (and especially to serve!). I’ve found that in serve demonstrations, if I don’t go through this routine, I lose control of my serves.On receive, players also have routines, but they are usually more subtle, involving swaying back and forth between the legs (watch Ma Long) as they get into their receive position, or just getting into their ready positions. This primes them physically, plus it clears their minds so they are ready to react to anything.But routine isn’t important just before serving or receiving. It’s also good to have a pre-match routine. Some listen to music. Some meditate. Some shadow-practice. The purpose, once again, is to prime you for the match, which often means preparing the mind (often clearing it, and then thinking of a few tactical things), and the body physically.So create your own routines – or steal one from someone! – and soon you will be primed for each match.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2695title: June 12 - Great Serves are the Best Way to Avoid Upsets and Compete with Strong Playersdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Of all the techniques in table tennis, serving is the one where playing level plays no part. What does that mean? It means that a high-level player doesn’t have any advantage over an intermediate player in developing great serves. When you serve, the ball’s not randomly moving or spinning – you just toss it in the air and hit it with your paddle. Anybody can practice that, and anybody can have great serves. It does take coaching to learn how to do itproperly(with spin, deception, and control), and lots of practice time – but given those two, which is often what separates the elite from the non-elite, anyone can dominate with their serves.And great serves are the best way to avoiding upsets, as well as the best way to put you in a position to compete with strong players. Great serves primarily do two things. First, they win you lots of points outright, either when the opponent misses them or pops them up, giving you an easy put-away. (This is especially true against weaker players.) Second, they set you up to attack in whatever way you do best. (This is especially important when playing stronger players, who won’t miss against your tricky serves as much.)To use a personal example, last night I discussed this very topic with a student, who was about 1700 in level (making him a good intermediate player). Then we played points, where I’d serve, and all he had to do was get the ball back without popping it up. I threw every trick serve I had at him – fast no-spin at the elbow; reverse pendulum short to the forehand (breaking away from him); big breaking sidespin serves to the wide backhand (where I’d often fake a reverse pendulum serve, switching at the last second); side-top serves that looked like backspin (with my racket tip going down vigorously at contact, but the actual contact near the handle, where the racket was movingup); and others. He outright missed the first nine in a row before finally weakly popping one of them back. He’s now working on developing some of these serves.But it’s not just trick serves. One of my regular “challenges” I do with students is where we play games where I serve every time, and have only one shot to win the point – serve and put-away. For these games, I mostly use straight third-ball serves, where I mix in very low backspin, sidespin, and no-spin serves, usually short to the middle (where second bounce, given the chance, would be near the receiver’s end-line, i.e. “half-long”), along with some of the trick serves above. Since I’ve been doing these serve and attacks for 41 years (I’ve played a long time), even at my relatively advanced age I get ball after ball that I can attack easily, and I’m primarily a forehand attacker. I don’t advice you develop a game where you have to put the ball away on the first shot after your serve, but you should develop serves that often let you do so, and regularly put you in a position to attack effectively.Great serves also help you develop the rest of your game. They raise your overall level of play directly, and so you get to compete with stronger players, which pushes you to an even higher level of play. Plus they give you lots of practice following them up with attacks, which improves your attack and makes you even better. Develop your serves, and your whole game will spiral upwards!As I often proclaim to students, the primary purpose of the serve is to set up your attack. This is even true for defensive players, who, if they develop good serves, should look to attack after their serve when they can, and fall back on defense if the shot isn’t there. This doesn’t mean serve and rip; it means following up the serve with a consistent attack, and putting the ball away only against weak returns.The result of developing great serves? Using a mixture of “trick serves” and “third-ball serves,” you can play pretty poorly and still lock up weaker players, thereby avoiding bad losses that would normally be attributed to playing poorly. Good serves will also keep you in the game even against strong players, as you’ll at minimum get a few free points and get to start off half the rallies at an advantage. The rest of your game may have a bad day, but if you develop great serves and regularly practice them, you will never have a bad serving day – and with dominant serves, you’ll rarely have those bad losses from playing poorly.So how do you develop these great serves? The same way you develop any technique – learn from coaches and top players with great serves, and practice, Practice, PRACTICE!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2689title: June 5, 2017 - Rallying Tactics for Blockersdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:(This is an excerpt fromTable Tennis Tactics for Thinkers. The book also has sections on Serving Tactics for Blockers, Receiving Tactics for Blockers, Chop and Sidespin Blocking, and Playing Blockers. Several people have asked about tactics for blockers, so I might as well use what I've already written!)There are generally three types of blockers: aggressive blockers, steady blockers, and change-of-pace blockers. A blocker should learn all three, but probably favor one of them.Aggressive blockers should attack the wide corners and opponent’s elbow with nearly every shot. Their goal is to put so much pressure on the opponent that he finally misses or makes a weak return the blocker can put away. Many blockers use their backhand blocking to set up their forehand smash or loop-kill. (A good blocker who can smash effectively from both sides can be rather scary, but there aren’t too many of them.)Steady blockers are just that. Since their blocks are not as aggressive, blocking to the opponent’s elbow isn’t as effective, so they should focus mostly on wide angles. However, sometimes this can backfire as an angled block can be attacked right back at a wide angle. So a steady blocker might sometimes want to go to the middle to cut off the angled return. This pulls the opponent out of position so he has to move more on the next shot, causing more mistakes. In general, a steady blocker wants to focus on the opponent’s weaker side, and go there over and over. Sometimes this means going to the strong side first, and the rest of the rally going after the weak side.A change-of-pace blocker wants to throw off the opponent’s rhythm by changing the pace and depth of his blocks by mixing in aggressive and dead blocks. Often a faster block is easier to attack then one that dies more over the table, putting the table partly in the way and throwing off the opponent’s timing. However, too many dead blocks lose their effectiveness, so a change-of-pace blocker needs to complement his dead blocks with aggressive ones. (The exception might be a long pips blocker, but that’ll be covered in the chapter on Non-Inverted Surfaces.)Some blockers change the pace with sidespin blocks, especially pips-out players and penholders with conventional backhands. It not only changes the pace, but the sidespin gives the opponent difficulty. It’s important for blockers to learn this technique; otherwise, they are missing an important tool in their tactical toolbox. Most often you sidespin block by moving the racket from right to left at contact, most often into the opponent’s wide backhand where it breaks away from him. Some sidespin block the other way by moving the racket from left to right at contact, often blocking this one into the wide forehand, where it breaks away from the opponent.A blocker who can’t put the ball away effectively has a huge handicap. Imagine blocking someone all over the court, forcing the weak ball, and not being able to hit a winner! Most blockers develop at least an efficient smash for when they do get such a weak ball, but many do not develop a good attack otherwise (a strategic mistake), relying instead on quick, steady blocking to win the point, which limits their tactical options. A hitter/blocker, however, would end the point quickly as soon as he saw a ball to smash. There are also many looper-blockers, especially ones who loop on the forehand but mostly block on the backhand, which can be a pretty successful way to play, such as three-time World Men’s Singles Champion Guo Yuehua (1981, 83, 85), considered by many the greatest player ever, though his one-winged penhold looping style might not match up well these days against modern two-winged loopers.Some blockers with good attacks are a master of the “I’ll give you one chance to attack” strategy. This means they are willing to push long to a corner one time, challenging the opponent to go out of position to attack it. The opponent doesn’t get to pick his shot; the blocker only gives him one chance. If the opponent doesn’t attack, and instead pushes it back, the blocker takes the attack.Conventional attacking players, especially loopers, often do not develop their blocking game even though they use it in matches. This is a handicap; if you are going to block in a game, you need to develop the shot to the fullest, including all of the methods outlined here.One common weakness of blockers, including other styles who also block, is the lack of a forehand down-the-line block. When players loop to the forehand, it is almost invariably blocked crosscourt, even at the higher levels. This can be effective since you do have a wide angle to the forehand, and about 15.5 more inches going crosscourt than down the line. But going crosscourt is so common that players are used to this—but they are often absolutely frozen by an unexpected down-the-line block. The down-the-line forehand block is not a hard shot to do, it’s just one that few bother learning. This is partly because they warm up crosscourt so much, and because, deep down, they are trying to play it safe, and go where there’s more room and with the more natural block. Instead, learn to tilt the racket tip back so as to angle your forehand block down the line, and watch the awkward returns of your opponent!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2684title: May 29, 2017 - Contact Point on Racket When Servingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:You can maximize, minimize, and otherwise vary the spin on your serve (for deception) by varying the contact point. How do you do this?To maximize the spin, contact the ball near the tip, which is the fastest moving part of the racket when you serve, since it’s the farthest part from the wrist, which should be snapping the racket through the ball. If you really want to maximize this, you should normally contact it a little to the side of the tip. For example, for a righty serving a forehand pendulum serve, the wrist is on the right side of the racket, so the farthest part of the racket is the left side of the tip – and so you get the most spin by contacting it there.However, maximizing spin isn’t the only thing a serve wants to do – he also wants to vary the spin. The simplest way is to simply contact the ball near the throat, which is moving much slower than the tip. The result is very little spin without changing the serving motion. If you are serving backspin, and the receiver doesn’t see the change in the contact point, he’ll think there’s more backspin on the ball then there is, and so will likely pop the ball up or go off the end. If you do serve a no-spin like this, make sure to sell it – a big follow-through!Another way to vary the spin by varying the contact point is to change the axis of the racket’s rotation. If you serve with only a forearm motion, then the axis of rotation is the elbow. If you snap your wrist into the shot, then the axis of rotation is the wrist. But suppose, as you contact the ball, you change the axis of rotation to around the middle of the racket? Then the tip might be going down while the throat is moving sideways or up. If you contact it with the tip, you might get backspin, but if you contact it near the throat, you get sidespin, topspin, or a combination. But the receiver will see the tip moving down – vigorously! – and so will likely read it as backspin. Result? They pop it up or go off the end. Once again you have varied the spin without changing the serving motion.These principles follow for all serves, but vary according to the specific serving motion. Start thinking about your motion, perhaps doing it in slow motion (without the ball) so you can practice varying the spin with the same motion. Then get a box of balls and practice it!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2678title: May 22, 2017 - Looping to the Forehand, Backhand, and Middledate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Looping to the different placements can get very different results. A type of loop to one part of the table might not work so well somewhere else. No two players are alike, so early on in any match you need to find out what type of looping works to the three main locations – wide forehand, wide backhand, and middle (roughly the opponent’s playing elbow). But there are certain types that generally work best – or not – to given locations.Most players block more quickly and effectively on the backhand. However, because their body is in the way, they may get jammed and have trouble with deep, spinny loops. The downside is that you have the ball control to consistently keep it deep – a spinny loop that goes deep on the table might be highly effective, but the same loop a foot shorter may be killed or blocked aggressively.While most players aren’t as quick or effective on the forehand block, the body isn’t in the way. This means they are better against deeper loops than on the backhand, and may especially be good at attacking spinny loops, even if they go deep. But they don’t have as much control as on the backhand, and don’t cover the wide angle as well. Slow, spinny loops that land short to the forehand (where they react too slowly), mixed in with more aggressive ones to the wide forehand, will often throw off their timing. So variation and angle is often more effective here.If a player has time, they can use their best shot against loops to the middle, often a backhand block or forehand counter-attack. And so when looping to the middle you want to be aggressive, rushing the opponent into mistakes. This doesn’t mean you have to rip the ball, but it needs to be fast enough to rush the opponent. Slow, spinny loops might not be as effective as the opponent has time to react and use his best shot. On the other hand, going to the middle takes away any extreme blocking angles.To summarize:Looping to backhand: Focus on depth and heavy topspin.Looping to forehand: Focus on variation and angle.Looping to middle: Focus on aggressiveness, but don't overdo it.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2673title: May 15, 2017 - Towel for Fast Serve Practicedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most players, when trying to serve fast and deep, are not really aware of where the first bounce is on their side of the table. Even those who are aware have a hard time seeing it as it happens rather fast. To maximize the speed, you want the ball to bounce as close to your end-line as possible - but most players, when doing this serve, have the first bounce well over the table, usually over a foot in. When asked, they often aren't sure of where the first bounce is, but assume it's close to their end-line, even if it wasn't even close to that. How to solve this problem?Spread a towel on your side of the table, about six inches from your end-line. Then practice your fast, deep serves. Your first ones will likely hit the towel - instant feedback!!! Try serving so the ball hits in that first six inches. If you have trouble doing it, try hitting the side of the table on your end-line. Eventually you'll become more aware of where your first bounce is, and learn to keep it close to your end-line, maximizing the speed of the serve. Once you've done that, watch how deep your serve goes - now's the time to make sure it hits very deep, or once again you are not maximizing the speed. Once you've learned to serve so the first bounce is near your end-line, and the second bounce near the opponent's end-line, you can work on perfecting the serve, with various topspins, sidespins, and flat versions, to the wide corners and where the opponent’s middle would be. (It turns outDouglas Adams was right about towels!)Here are some Tips on deep serves:How to Execute a Fast ServeThe Fifteen Fast and Deep ServesTurn Opponents into Puppets with Long Serves===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2668title: May 8, 2017 - Advantage of Passive Receivesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most coaches stress the importance of playing aggressive. This is especially true when you are serving, where you should generally follow up your serve with an attack unless the receiver does something to stop it. But many coaches also stress the importance of being aggressive on receive, and many players adopt this, and so are constantly attacking the serve. Against long serves, you should almost always be aggressive, but many are just as aggressive against short serves.There are many advantages to this. By attacking the serve, the receiver takes control of the point, and the more he does this, the better he gets at it. There is, of course, the downside that if you are aggressive when receiving, you’ll make more mistakes. But that’s part of attacking, and is often offset by the points won by attacking the serve.But there are also problems that arise with players who habitually attack the serve, especially short serves. Many players make it central to their game to flip nearly every serve, whether forehand or backhand. The first problem that comes out of this is that this type of player is predictable. An aggressive flip of a short serve is more effective when it is unexpected. When the receiver does this over and over, the server can adopt a serving plan specifically for that – focusing on serving very low, with great spin and/or spin variation. They can also position themselves after the serve for the predictable flip coming. Between the missed flips and the server being able to anticipate and prepare for the predictable flip, a smart server will have the advantage here against players his own level. This alone is reason enough for a smart receiver, even an aggressive one, to vary his receive.But there’s a more hidden long-term problem with being overly aggressive against short serves. Players who habitually push short serves back long, giving the server the attack, learn to handle those attacks. Their games become much more flexible as they are comfortable both attacking and reacting to an opponent’s attack. (Note I didn’t say defending – some handle the opponent’s attack by counter-attacking, usually with aggressive blocking or counterlooping.) Players who attack most short serves often do not always develop this flexibility, and are only comfortable on the attack. This especially happens as a player improves and plays better players, who can counter-attack more effectively against these flipped receives – and so the attacking receiver, who might be used to dominating rallies with their flips, suddenly find themselves dealing with counter-attacks they aren’t used to or able to handle, and so have great difficulty in learning to deal with it – which wouldn’t have been a problem if they’d developed a more rounded receive from the start, with both aggressive and non-aggressive receives.So it’s important to develop the skill of pushing short serves back long and handling opponent’s attack as at least one aspect of your receive game. Key to this, of course, is pushing long effectively – something you can only learn to do by doing it, just as you can only learn to flip a short serve or push it short by doing it. Practice all three – pushing long or short, and flipping – and you’ll have a much better receiving game and more developed game overall. Sometimes the best way of doing this is to have stages where you focus on one of these three receives until you are comfortable with it, and then focus on another – and eventually use all three interchangeably, depending on the opponent.Here are some Tips on pushing.Push with Purpose and PlacementPushing: Five out of Six Doesn't Cut ItPushing Change of DirectionWinning with Backspin for the Non-ChopperPushing ShortBackhand Sidespin PushThe Many Ways to Receive a Short Backspin Serve===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2662title: May 1, 2017 - Strive to Make Every Shot a Memorable Onedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:How often do you play a careless, nonchalant shot, one that you’d like to quickly forget? Perhaps a soft, just get-the-ball-on-the-table push, or a please-hit-the-table loop, or perhaps a keep-the-ball-in-play backhand?Now watch a top player, live or on video. (Go to Youtube.com and put in “Table Tennis” and lots will appear.) Watch and see how often they do careless, nonchalant, forgettable shots. Basically, never. They may make mistakes, but rarely do they do something where they aren’t even attempting to do the shot well. They strive to make every shot count . . . becauseEvery Shot Counts. Even when they do something as simple as a push, watch how focused they are on doing it correctly, perfectly . . . memorably. For a top player, every shot is a memorable shot, or it’s a weak shot.You should have the same attitude. It doesn’t matter whether you are looping and smashing, or just pushing and blocking; like the top players, you should strive to make every one of them a memorable shot. If you push long, make it a memorable push, one that the opponent has to struggle with because you did it so well that the shot would be remembered – if not for the fact that you are striving to make every shot memorable, and so it gets lost in a seas of memorable shots.Memorable doesn’t mean spectacular.If the goal of the shot is to, say, simply tie up the opponent on his backhand side, a simple block will do. But it should be donecorrectly– perhaps right off the bounce, deep into the wide backhand, aggressive enough so the opponent can’t do anything with it. It may seem a boring, bland shot, but if you do it exactly as needed, so that it does exactly what it is supposed to do, it is a memorable shot. Maybe not to you, at first, but to the opponent it is memorable as it is the shot that he remembers that (in this example) keeps him tied up on his backhand.And guess what? When you can string together many such memorable shots,youbecome the top player on the video players study to see how top players strive to make every shot memorable.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2657title: April 24, 2017 - How Do You Develop Ball Control and a Feel for the Ball?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:We’ve all see those types of players who have this “feel” for the ball, who can adjust to anything and make the ball do anything. Some do it close to the table, with regular blocks at different speeds as well as topspin, chop, and sidespin blocks, or pushes they can put anywhere on the table, short or long. Others do it off the table, with lobbing, fishing, and counterloops. Anything these players can touch they can get back anywhere on the table, with varying spins and speeds. How do they develop these skills?Like anything else, you develop this through practice. If a player can vary his blocks, it’s because he’s practiced this, either in drills or games. If he has great control of his pushes, he’s been practicing it. If he has great topspin control from off the table, it means he’s practiced it until he’s develop such a feel for the ball that he can topspin anything back, whether he’s counterlooping, fishing, or lobbing.Suppose you want to develop an off-table topspin defense game. Then have someone practice their attack – whether looping or hitting – while you practice your off-table topspin defense game. It’s as simple as that. Many players complain they don’t have the feel for the ball needed for this, but that’s because they haven’t systematically practiced it, which is how you develop that feel. The same is true if you want to learn to vary your blocks – you have to practice these variations with a practice partner.Note that when you do such practice, you are not only systematically practicing a specific shot, but you are also systematically practicingadjustingto incoming shots. While adjusting to an incoming shot is central to developing any shot, it’s more extreme with ball control shots – and making this a habit is central to developing a ball control game.So you develop ball control with the same systematic approach as other shots, except instead of just systematically developing the shot, you also systematically develop thehabitof adjustment. That means that if you are close to the table blocking, instead of just blocking the same way every time, try changing the pace, placement, and spin (topspin, sidespin, chop) of your blocks, and have your practice partner give you different shots to work against, until you develop a feel for such adjustments.If you are more off the table, it’s the same thing, except now you are counterlooping, fishing, or lobbing – but do so with different spins (topspin, sidespin both ways), and with different contact points – sometimes top of the bounce, sometimes a little after that, sometimes (against a hard-hit shot) farther back, thereby developing a feel for these shots from anywhere on the court against any incoming shot.It’s a different mentality than the more common systematic attacking, counter-attacking, or standard blocking play of most players – but that’s why many players aren’t ball control experts. It also doesn’t fit all parts of everyone’s game – some players are simply better with all-out attacks, rarely backing up (so rarely fishing, lobbing, or counterlooping from far off the table), and there’s nothing wrong with that – but that doesn’t mean they can’t develop ball control with other shots, such as pushing (short and long pushes against short backspin or no-spin serves) or change-of-pace blocks. And by using such ball control shots, they’ll learn when they are effective in setting up the other parts of their games – and maybe, just maybe, they’ll learn to add such ball control shots to their game at times when they are more effective than just blindly attacking or counter-attacking everything.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2652title: April 17, 2017 - Serving to the Backhand Flipperdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:What do you do against a player who attacks all of your serves with his backhand, even the short ones? Even if you serve short to the forehand he reaches over and backhand flips. (Or perhaps he does forehand flip – much of this article deals with that as well.) He may be doing this with a regular backhand flip or abanana flip, but the effect is the same – you are on the defensive over and over on your own serve. What should you do? Here are six options.Serve Low. Most players don't really serve low, and get away with it because most opponents don't attack backspin serves, especially if they are short. Become aware of how low your serve is when it crosses the net, and even more importantly, how low it bounces on the far side, and practice so you can serve with the ball barely above the net, with a nice low bounce on the far side. This makes it much harder to attack, and when an opponent does attack it, the attack is usually either softer or more erratic. (Here's my articleServing Low.)Serve Long. If an opponent keeps attacking your shorter serves, throw deep serves at him. Few players are equally good at attacking short and long serves, especially if you mix them up. (Here are my articlesTurn Opponents into Puppets with Long ServesandFifteen Important Deep Serves.)Serve Heavy. If you load up the backspin, many opponents will struggle to attack it. This is true of any spin, but heavy backspin especially will stop many attackers. If they do open their rackets a lot to attack this backspin, throw in a side-top serve and they’ll likely flip it off.Backspin/No-Spin Combos. Mix up the spin, from backspin to no-spin serves. Often players who attack short serves use your spin against you – but when faced with a low, no-spin ball (key word: low!), have great difficulty. So throw no-spin balls at them, and watch them struggle – and then mix in backspin and other serves, including side-top and deep serves. (Here's my articleThe Power of a Low, Short, No-Spin Serve.)Serve from Middle of Table. The problem with serving short to the forehand with some players is they just step over and receive backhand. What you need is more angle – so serve from the middle of the table. This gives you an angle into the forehand. If you use the same motion and can serve short to the forehand or long to the backhand, your opponent will have to guard against the latter, and so have to receive with their forehand when you serve into the forehand.Counter-Attack. If you know your opponent is going to attack your serve, expect it, and be ready to counter-attack. Since you know it's coming, even against a quicker opponent you should be able to get one good counter-attack in, so make sure it's a good one – and that means place it well, either to the wide corners or (usually most effective on the first attack or counter-attack) the opponent's elbow. If the opponent is over the table attacking your short serve, you can jam him on that first shot.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2646title: April 10, 2017 - First Step to Blocking Well is Taking That First Stepdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:We all do it at least sometimes, either out of laziness or bad habit (or more specifically, lack of agoodhabit). The opponent attacks, and the ball is perhaps foot or two away, or maybe just a few inches, and rather than step to the ball, allowing us to use our honed blocking technique, we instead just reach for the ball, and improvise the blocking stroke. You can get away with it to an extent, but the cost is an erratic block.In the large majority of cases, it’s not that the player isn’t quick enough to take that step; it’s a matter of not having thehabit. It doesn’t matter if the ball is one foot away or one inch, the stroke should start with your stepping into position so you can have a repeatable stroke, rather than an improvised, awkward one. Even against an extremely hard-hit shot you should reflexively be stepping toward the ball even as you reach for it.You shouldn’t think of it in terms of whether or not you have to step to the ball. You shouldassumeyou have to step to the ball, and be flexing your knees slightly as the opponent is hitting as you prep yourself to move. And then, 99% of the time, you step to the ball, even if it’s just a one-inch step. To develop that habit takes practice, but with practice, it becomes a habit. Once it becomes a habit, you’ll have a much better block!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2640title: April 3, 2017 - Coaching Tournament Matchesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:[This is an excerpt fromTable Tennis Tactics for Thinkers.]Many players either give or receive coaching at tournaments at some point. But what magic words of wisdom can a coach say between games that can transform a losing game into inspired victory?If I had those words, I’d sell them for a lot of money.Not having those words to give to you, here is the next best thing: what type of things you can say, as a coach, to get the most out of the short time you have between games with your player. It might not transform your player into a member of the National Team (or maybe it will), but it might turn a close loss into a victory, and might even make a lopsided match close.Start by judging the player’s emotional state. Is he too tense? Too lackadaisical? If the first, your first job is to calm him down. If the latter, you must wake him up.If you are coaching an overly excitable player, make sure to be calm and relaxed when you speak to him. Speak slowly and clearly. Tell him to take his time and clear his mind. If he is angry with himself, you have to get him to put that aside, maybe even say a joke to get his mind off whatever is bothering him. You have to clear his mind.If the player seems lackluster, this doesn’t mean you do the reverse and talk fast and excitedly. (An interesting idea!) Tell him tofight!Use your own emotions to psych him up. Perhapsbea little excited. Let him know that his match is important, and perhaps he will start to think so as well. Note that a player often wants to win a match badly, and wants to try hard, but cannot get himself up for the match without help. You are that help.Now that your player is properly psyched up and/or calm and relaxed, what do you tell him? The basic rule is: Not Too Much.If you fill your player’s mind with ten intricate tactics for winning, all you’ve accomplished is confusing your player’s mind. He’s not going to remember much of it, if any. It’s best to decide the most important things, and forget the rest. Keep it simple. Remember KISS, which in this case can be for “Keep it Short and Simple.”Remember the very start of chapter one? “Tactics isn’t about finding complex strategies to defeat an opponent. Tactics is about sifting through all the zillions of possible tactics and finding a few simple ones that work.” Remember this both when you play and when you coach.A good breakdown of advice between games would be, at most, two or three things about serving, one or two things about receiving, and one or two things about rallying. But remember that less is often more—you don’t want to come up with the maximum number of items for each of these three areas. Sometimes you might only do perhaps one thing about serve, one about receive, and one about rallying. Or perhaps some other combination of two or three things.During a rally a player can’t stop and think about each shot. The only time he can do that is when he is serving. Therefore, service tactics are the most useful ones that can be given, and the most easily followed.Service tactics can be broken down into the same two types as they were in the chapter on Service Tactics: set-up serves and trick serves. Set-up serves are those that the player should use most often, i.e. perhaps serve short backspin to the forehand and follow with a loop, or maybe serve fast and deep and following up by hitting. Trick serves are those that a player can use to get a “free” point, but can only be used occasionally, such as a fast down-the-line serve to the forehand, or a fast no-spin to the middle. A good coach can figure out which of these types of serves will be most effective.Receive tactics are often very specific. Should the player loop the deep serve? Against short serves, should the player mostly flip, push short, or push long? Should he return serves to the forehand or backhand side? But remember to remind the player to vary the receive. Often a player, in following the coach’s advice, becomes predictable.Rallying tactics are the hardest for most players to follow—they can’t stop and think over what to do, and usually they’re busy getting back into position, rather than being in a ready position as when receiving. Give simple and more general strategy, such as “Stay close to the table,” or “Look for chances to attack his middle.” Or the generic, “Play aggressive!”Service tactics should often be combined with how the serve should be followed up, since that’s normally the whole purpose of the serve. For example, you may tell a player to do a certain serve mostly short to the forehand and follow with a loop mostly to the opponent’s elbow.One thing that often comes up: when coaching kids, don’t talk down to them. Literally. Squat down to their level. Deep down, it’s psychologically intimidating to have to crane your neck to look up at a coach, who is looking down at you while spewing his words of wisdom.Also be careful about being preachy when coaching. Make it a two-way thing—there’s no crime in asking the player what his tactics are, and then expanding on what he’s already doing. Before a match, before I say anything tactical, I sometimes ask the player I’m coaching, “What’s your game plan?” If he has a good one, then all I do is expand on it.Stay upbeat and positive. If you’re not happy with what the player is doing, there’s a temptation to be negative or start lecturing in a preachy fashion. This doesn’t help. Instead, stay positive as you coach. Always remember that what may seem simple from the sidelines isn’t always so simple at the table.Never bring up the opponent’s rating. If the opponent is higher, it might intimidate your player, while if it’s lower, it puts pressure on them to win against this “weaker” opponent. Never mention how important the match is or anything else that might bring unneeded pressure to the match. In fact, do the opposite to remove pressure. I often tell players to imagine it’s just another match at the club.Make sure you are familiar with a player’s game and skills if you are coaching him. The last thing you want to do is tell him to do something he isn’t able to do at a proficient level, or isn’t comfortable with. You might want to ask the player to let you know if there’s anything you are saying that he’s not comfortable with—otherwise you may never find out, and your coaching may be counter-productive.Except occasionally at the beginning levels, between games is not the time to talk about technique. It’s too late; techniques have to be ingrained in advance. Occasionally a coach can spot a basic technique flaw that was causing the player to miss, but it’s rare that the player can make an adjustment on the fly in the middle of a match. However, there are exceptions.Sometimes a coach doesn’t even have to coach much; sometimes all a player needs is someone he can explain his tactics to, to help him clarify his own thinking, though you should speak up if you have something to add. A good coach should be a good listener before and after matches, and even during a match, within the constraints of the short amount of time he has between games and in time-outs (one minute in each case).A coach might also want to call a time-out at a key point in a match. See the section on this in the chapter on Conventional Tactics. Remember that the final decision on whether to take a time-out is the player’s, so I always tell my players in advance that if I call a time-out, but they feel they are focused and know what to do, they should turn it down and save the time-out for later when they may better need it.Now for the clincher. If you are a player and don’t have a coach when you play, you can follow the above and coach yourself between games. Break things down as shown above, and pretty soon you’ll be your favorite, most reliable coach.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2636title: March 27 - Serve and Forehand Loopdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Back in the 1960s and 1970s, a common slogan in table tennis was “One gun is as good as two.” This was back in the days of the all-out forehand attacker. Many of the dominant players (especially from Asia) would mostly just block on the backhand – often aggressive jab blocks, but not penetrating attacks – and end the point with the forehand. Some would relentlessly attack with the forehand, others would use those quick backhand blocks to set up the forehand, but the game was mostly centered around the forehand attack, whether it was smashing or looping.While the art of the all-out forehand attack is dying out, most of the top players still strongly favor the forehand, and often still cover the whole table with it when they can, though they don’t force it as often as players from the past. But there’s one time where top players will still sometimes relentlessly use the forehand – and that’s to follow up their serve. The whole idea of the serve is to force at least a slightly weak ball, and that’s all that’s needed for a top player to end the point – and the forehand is usually best for that.So how do you go about developing a serve and forehand attack? Here are ten guidelines. (I’m assuming both players are righties; lefties and those playing lefties will have to adjust. Note that serve and forehand attack was my specialty during my playing days!)Depth of Serve.In general, long serves can be attacked and so are harder to follow up with a forehand attack. So most often you’ll want to serve short. However, generally not too short – if you serve to short, the opponent can take it quick off the bounce and both rush you and angle you. He can also drop the ball short. The “ideal” third-ball attack serve is one that, given the chance, would bounce twice on the other side, with the second bounce as deep as possible, ideally an inch or so inside the end-line. With this depth, a receiver can’t really rush you or angle you, and so you can follow with a forehand attack more often. But vary the depth – sometimes serve very long (first bounce near the end-line) or very short (especially to the forehand) to force the receiver to have to guard against many things.Placement of Serve.Below are guidelines. The key is to favor the best placement, but vary it so the receiver has to guard against them all, forcing more mistakes.-If you serve short to thebackhand, you give the receiver a wide angle into your backhand, making it difficult to follow with a forehand. If you have fast feet, this can still be effective as you can crowd your backhand corner, knowing the receiver has no angle into your forehand and can only go down the line there.-If you serve short to forehand, you give the receiver a wide angle into your forehand. Since you have to guard against this, it leaves you open to a down-the-line receive into your backhand, taking away your forehand attack. However, many players aren’t comfortable returning down the line against a short serve to the forehand, and automatically go crosscourt, giving the server a third-ball forehand attack. So it depends on the receiver.-If you serve short to themiddle, you take away both extreme angles and have less total table to cover. This is generally the best placement if you want to follow your serve up with a forehand attack. The down side is it allows the receiver to choose whether to receive forehand or backhand, and so he can use his better side.??Spin Variation on Serve. Many of the best third-ball serves are backspin serves, since they will often be pushed back long, allowing you to attack. However, if you overdo this, you make things rather easy for the receiver, who can push your predictable backspin serve back more and more aggressively. Instead, vary the serve. One of the best variations is to fake backspin and instead serve a very low no-spin serve. Receivers will often pop it up, and their pushes will have less spin than if they pushed against backspin. Also throw in sidespin and sidespin-topspin serves. The more you mix up your spins, the more problems the receiver will have. Key for all of these serves, especially no-spin serves, is to keep the ball low. This both makes it harder to attack the serve, and often makes passive returns even more passive.Types of Sidespin on Serve.-If you serve a left sidespin(such as a forehand pendulum serve, racket moving from right to left), then the receiver will tend to return the ball to your backhand side. Perhaps more important, it makes it tricky to return to the wide forehand, and so you can often stand more to your backhand side, allowing you to follow your serve with a forehand attack, even from the wide backhand. Most forehand attackers prefer attacking from the backhand side as it puts them in position to follow up with another forehand attack. This type of sidespin serve is best done to the middle or backhand. If you do it short to the forehand, you have to guard against the angle into your forehand, giving the receiver an easy return down the line to your backhand, which is easier to do against this type of sidespin. This doesn’t mean you don’t ever do it short to the forehand, but it should mostly be as a variation unless the receiver struggles against it.-If you serve a right sidespin(such as a backhand serve, tomahawk serve, or reverse pendulum serve), then the receiver will tend to return the ball to your forehand side, especially if you serve it to the forehand side, where it’s awkward for many to go down the line, especially against this type of sidespin. This allows a relatively easy forehand attack. However, it also puts you on your forehand side, and so the opponent can block your attack to your backhand, taking away your forehand. It’s for this reason that many forehand attackers prefer to attack out of the backhand side, and so tend to favor left sidespin serves. This type of sidespin is also effective to the middle, as it will usually still be returned toward your forehand side, but with less angle. It can also be served into the backhand, though many players find that sidespin to the backhand easier to handle than a sidespin that breaks away from them.Positioning After the Serve.Where should you stand after your serve? There’s a simple way of determining this. Imagine a somewhat aggressive return to your wide forehand. Stand as far over to your backhand side as you can where you can still just cover that wide forehand shot. If the receiver can make more than just a somewhat aggressive return to your wide forehand, then you need to position yourself to cover that – and more importantly, work on your serves so opponents can’t attack them so easily.Ready Stance. Make sure after your serve you go into a ready stance where you are ready to move in either direction – weight on the balls of your feet, knees slightly bent, relatively wide stance. Flex your knees slightly as the receiver is hitting the ball as this will save you time in starting your movement. The key is to be ready for that first step, no matter which direction it is.When to React. Most players wait until they see where the receiver has hit the ball before moving. But you should move well before that – a receiver normally commits to a shot before contact. If you watch their swing when they receive, you can learn at what point you can see where they are going. Generally, by the time the receiver starts his forward swing you should be able to see where and what his return will be, and so should be moving into position to attack. Some players, mostly advanced ones, can disguise or change their shot or placement later in their shot, so watch out for that – but even they have to commit to a shot before contact.How Hard to Attack. Many players think that they need to rip the ball every chance. That’s usually a mistake. Instead, look to make well-placed aggressive attacks that put pressure on the opponent (winning many points outright) and set you up for the next shot. If you see an easy winner, by all means take it, but focus on placement more than sheer speed. Against a heavy backspin, sometimes the best option is a very spinny, deep loop, which sets you up for the next shot. (The very slowness of your shot even gives you time to get into position for the next shot.) In general, there are two types of placements when you attack. If you see an open corner, that’s where to go. Often opponents guard against the crosscourt, leaving themselves open to down the line attacks. Or they can only cover to the corner, leaving themselves open to more angled attacks. But assuming the opponent is in position and can cover the corners effectively, usually the best place to attack is right at the opponent’s playing elbow. It forces them to make a split second decision between forehand and backhand, leading to many mistakes and weak returns, and it takes away any extreme angles for their returning, thereby allowing you to continue to attack, often with the forehand.Follow Through Back into Position. It’s not enough to serve and forehand attack; you have to get back into position for the next shot. The key here is to follow through back into position. If you do a forehand from the wide forehand side, follow through back to your left. If you do a forehand from the wide backhand side, follow through back to your right. You may want to position yourself using the same positioning rule used for after your serve – as far to your backhand side as you can be while still covering a moderately aggressive return to your wide forehand.Mentality. If you want to have an effective serve and forehand attack game, you must have the right mentality for it. First, you must commit yourself to the idea that unless the receiver does something to stop it, you are going to serve and forehand attack. (This also applies to the two-winged attacker, who can commit to attacking from either side unless the receiver does something to stop it.) Second, understand that getting into position to attack with the forehand is more about proper preparation and reaction than foot speed. If you are in very bad physical condition, then you probably aren’t going to be running around playing forehands all over the place, but if you are in reasonably good shape, you can at least do this at the start of a rally, especially after your serve.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2625title: March 20, 2017 - Everything You Wanted to Know About Down the Linedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most players attack mostly crosscourt. There are good reasons for this – you have more table, and doesn’t give the opponent an extreme angle away from you on the return. But many players way overdo this. So let’s examine the facts about down-the-line attacks.Down-the-line is 9 feet. Crosscourt is about 10 feet 3.5 inches. That’s an extra 15.5 inches, making it a safer attack. But if you overdo it, it’s low percentage, since your opponent will be camped over there expecting it.Opponents often leave down-the-line open. When they see you attacking, they’ll immediately cover the crosscourt angle. Most players fall for this, since they are afraid that if they attack down the line, they’ll be open to a crosscourt angled return. It’s a legitimate concern – if the opponent is covering that line. At all levels, even among top players, there are many who guard against the crosscourt attack, and so are very good at it, relying on opponents who are afraid to go down the line.Aim crosscourt, go down-the-line. From the wide forehand, set up and backswing to attack crosscourt – then, at the last second, rotate your shoulders to the right and go down-the-line. The opponent will likely have moved to cover the crosscourt and you have an easy winner. Similarly, when doing a forehand attack from the backhand side, set up and backswing as if going crosscourt – then whip your shoulders around vigorously, taking the ball a little quicker, and go down the line. Again, it will often be an ace.What to do after a down-the-line attack. Since your opponent has an extreme crosscourt angle to block into, your ready position after your attack should be far enough in that direction that you can cover that angle – but you have to get therequickly. Don’t finish your follow through, and then move into position; you should follow through into that position. When you do a forehand from the wide forehand, you can use the momentum from your swing and from the right-to-left weight shift (for righties, reverse for lefties) to help get back into position quickly. When attacking a forehand from the backhand side, your weight should finish on your left foot (for a righty), and so you can push off thatduring your follow-throughto get back into position.Practicing down-the-line. It’s great practice to attack down-the-line to a practice partner’s block. If you can attack this way consistently, then crosscourt is easy, plus down-the-line attacks in a match situation becomes natural from practicing that way.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2619title: March 13, 2017 - Warm Up the Shots You’ll Be Usingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the strangest things I see repeatedly at tournaments is watching players warm up for a match without warming up the actual shots they’ll be using. Most warmup with forehand to forehand and backhand to backhand, then perhaps looping versus block (and vice versa), perhaps a little footwork. Some will play out points, thereby technically using (and therefore “warming up”) all the shots that they use in game play, at least against that practice partner. But are they really maximizing the benefits of such a warm up?Examine your game and see what shots you actually use in a match. Warming them up in the free-play of playing out points isn’t the most efficient way to warm each of them up. Instead, you want to systematically get each shot warmed up. That’s why experienced players come in early so they have extra time to get each shot ready.Let’s start at the beginning. Do you serve in a match? Of course, and yet how often do you warm up your serves? Or are your serves so basic that they don’t need a warm up? If so, then you better practice your serves until they are more front-line weapons that need warming up. Any serve you have will be better if you warm it up, which leads to more and varied spin, and better control. Better control means you serve lower to the net, more accurately to the opponent’s side, and with the depth you choose. Warming up deep serves is especially important, since they are most effective if they go very deep on the table – but can you really risk serving that deep without risking serving off if you don’t warm up the serve?Then there’s the receive. Do you warm this up, or try to do so one receive at a time in an actual tournament match? That’s not every effective, and likely will lead to many early losses. Instead, arrange with your partner to do some receive practice, where you throw common serves at each other. Probably over half of tournament serves are forehand pendulum serves to the backhand, so why would someone play a tournament match without warming up against this serve? Better still, scout out your early-round opponents to see what serves they use, and try to get warmed up against them.And then we get to the actual shots you use in a match. Forehand to Forehand, backhand to backhand, and looping against block are a good start, but what about looping against a push? Isn’t that what loopers will be doing over and over in a match? And yet many only loop against the block, then try to get this shot going in the heat of a tournament match. Do some serve and loop drills with your practice partner – serve backspin, he pushes, you loop. When it’s your partner’s turn, that’s when you warm up your block against an opening loop against backspin, which is usually spinnier than one against a block that most players warm up against. (And then they wonder why, in the tournament, they block off when the opponent loops against backspin.)Oh, did you forget about your backhand loop? Yes, everything you warm up on the forehand needs the same treatment on the backhand. Amazingly, many players “forget” to warm up their backhand loop, and wonder why they aren’t comfortable using it in a match, especially early on.Then there are all the other shots you might use, both forehand and backhand – pushing (both short and long), smashing, flipping, counterlooping, perhaps some off-table defense – chopping, fishing, or lobbing. If it’s something you use in a match, you should warm it up. If you sometimes lob, do you think you’ll lob better in the middle of a match without warming it up or if you do a few in advance to get the feel of the shot?Lastly, you don’t want your first points you actually play to be in a tournament match. So after your shots are warmed up, play out some points. Some play games; most just play out the points for practice, with whoever has the ball serving. Play real points, with real serves, just as if they were tournament matches. Mentally, play it like it’s your first-round match. Then, when you do play your first match, you’ll feel like you are already into the second round, mentally and physically warmed up and ready to play.So perhaps put together a checklist of all the things you need to warm up for a match, and bring it to tournaments as a reminder. It doesn’t have to be completely comprehensive; there are dozens of loop variations, for example, and you might not be able to warm them all up in the time allocated. (That running off-the-bounce inside-out sidespin forehand counterloop might not make the list.) Perhaps create two lists: things you must warm up, and things you should warm up.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2614title: March 6, 2017 - Footwork and Strokes: Use ‘Em or Lose ‘Emdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Yes, I'm talking to you, the aging table tennis player reading this article, or the younger but lazier one. You both have the ability to move when you play, but you don't do it enough. Sure, you gradually slow down as you age, and so many older players become more backhand-oriented rather than attacking with their forehand, which takes more footwork. Sure, younger players may find that if they use less footwork and simply stand at the table, they won't get caught out of position. Both of these are defensible positions. But guess what? The loss of footwork begins with a single non-use of your footwork. The more you don't use footwork, the faster you lose it, which gives you more reason not to use it, which accelerates the loss of footwork, which . . . you get the idea.It's not just footwork. When I was younger, I liked to counterloop off the bounce, or back up way off the table to counterloop. (Strangely, I was better at the two extremes.) Now that I'm older (read: stiffer and slower), these shots are harder to pull off. So it'd be best to stop using them, right? Then they'd become even harder to do from lack of use, making it even more important that I stop using them, accelerating the loss of these shots, which . . . you get the idea.Let me rephrase what I said above: The loss of any part of your game begins with a single non-use of it. Because you can't stop using it without a first non-use. So keep using it, even if it leads to a few short-term losses.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2607title: February 27, 2017 - Forehand Follow-Through Back into Positiondate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:A common mistake when playing a shot from a wide corner is to finish the stroke in a relatively stationary position at that wide corner. This is especially true of forehands from the wide forehand, where players often don't return to a neutral position quickly enough for the next shot, and often have to lunge for the next shot if it's to their wide backhand.The problem is they are not following through back into position. When you move wide to your forehand, moving back into position for the next shotneeds to be part of the follow-through- in fact, the very momentum from the shot should be used to do so. Most often when going to the wide forehand you step wide with the right leg (for a righty). After contact, you should be pushing yourself back into position with that right leg, as well as using the momentum from your swing to do so. This gets you back very quickly, and allows you to come to a stop, in position, so you are ready for the next shot. (If you do a crossover to move extra wide, you can still use the momentum of the swing to get you moving back into position.)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2602title: February 20, 2017 - Hitting Accurate Shotsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Players are often amazed at how accurate a top player can place his shots. This is an important skill to develop since the large majority of the time there are only three places you want to place your shots - wide forehand, wide backhand, and the opponent's middle (midway between forehand and backhand - seeAttacking the Middle, where this is explained). When your shot goes elsewhere (i.e. toward the middle of the forehand or backhand sides) you give your opponent a much easier shot, where he doesn't even have to move much. And yet most players let their shots drift out of these three spots, and lose many matches as a result. So how can you learn to hit these shots accurately?Obviously you can go out to the table and just practice relentlessly, aiming for these three shots. But there's a shortcut that'll help before you do all this relentless practice. Go to the backhand side of your table, stick your racket out as if you were doing a backhand block, and aim it crosscourt, wide to the opponent's backhand (if you are both righties). Make sure your racket is aimed right at the wide corner, or even slightly outside the corner. Keep holding the racket out there until you have literally memorized the feel of holding the racket in this position, so that in a game situation, you'll go into this position and hit the shot right to that spot.Now repeat, except now aim it down the line. Again, memorize the feel of holding the racket in that position. Then repeat one more time, this time aiming at where the opponent's middle would be. (Alas, you actually have to do this twice, for a righty and lefty opponent, since the righty's middle will be a bit to the right of the midline, the lefty to the left.)Once you've memorized the feel of the racket aiming where you want it to go, imagine the ball going to your left, and step there with your left foot, and imagine keeping the racket angle so that it still aims where you want it to go. Now imagine a ball going to your right, and step there with your right foot, and again imagine keeping the racket angle so that it still aims where you want it to go. Moving is no excuse for losing ball control - the ball will still go wherever you aim your racket.Now repeat all of the above with your forehand!Here are some complications to be aware of.When blocking, you can keep the racket aimed exactly where you want it to go the entire shot, so aiming should be easy. (Advanced players learn to change the direction of the racket at the last second to throw opponent's off, and you should as well, but in the end you are still aiming the ball where you want it to go, and if you memorize the feel of the racket aiming in each direction, you can do this very quickly.) With longer strokes, the racket may not aim where you want it to go during the backswing, but it should do so well before contact. Learn to time this so that the racket aims where you want the ball to go far enough before contact that you can get the feel of aiming the racket to the three spots. (Four if you count the middle twice, one for righties and one for lefties.)A ball with sidespin will bounce at least slightly sideways off your racket, and a ball coming at you from an angle will also bounce off your racket slightly sideways. However, if you stroke the ball sharply enough, this sideways movement is minimized to the point where you barely have to adjust for it.Unlike playing to the wide forehand and backhand, the opponent's middle is a moving target. His middle is based on where he is standing. As the opponent moves in a rally, his middle will move. Also, some players have both a neutral stance (so middle is about midway between forehand and backhand) and a forehand- or backhand-favoring stance (and so the middle moves more to "weaker" side). The more you play an opponent's middle the more it becomes natural to find this moving target.You won't always be hitting from the same spot. If you hit a backhand from the wide backhand, and another from the middle, you have to adjust where you aim the racket so that it still goes to the three spots. This quickly become second nature.Once you get into the habit of aiming the racket by learning the feel of it, you'll be able to accurately hit shots to the corners and middle at will, against any incoming shot, and from all parts of the table. This will put tremendous pressure on opponents since you won't be giving them many easy shots - and this relentless ball placement will pay off in many wins!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2595title: February 13, 2017 - When Caught Off Guard, Roll or Chop, and Keep the Ball Deepdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:It's inevitable that you'll be faced with unexpected shots that catch you off guard. You might be caught out of position and have to stretch for a shot. Or get fooled by the opponent and so react incorrectly, and so have to adjust. Or simply react to a net ball. What should you do?Beginners and most intermediate players simply get the ball back. But if you want to increase your chances of winning the point,do somethingwith your return.Keep the ball deep so opponent can't cream the ball at wide angles.This is the most important.Put a little (or a lot) of topspin or backspin on the ball. Why make things easy for him?Place the ball to a corner to force the opponent to move. If the player has a big forehand but is a bit slow, perhaps go to the backhand. Or if the player likes to play forehands from the backhand, perhaps go to the forehand to catch him going the wrong way.Place the ball to the middle to cut off extreme angles.Aim one way, and change directions at the last second to catch opponent off guard. This is the most difficult to develop as a habit, but also the best way to turn the tables on the opponent and completely mess him up.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2587title: December 31, 2016 - Top Ten Ways to Win and Lose a Matchdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Come into the match physically and mentally preparedHave a solid game plan, or quickly develop oneDominate with servesControl play with receiveGet your strengths into playDominate with quickness or powerConsistencyPlacement and depthVariationMental gritTop Ten Ways to Lose a MatchSee above. Add "Do not" or "Poor" at the start of each.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2583title: December 30, 2016 - How to Play Practice Matches with a Weaker Playerdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When playing practice matches with much weaker players, here are two suggestions: 1) Simplify your serves so you get higher quality returns to practice against; and 2) Decide something specific you want to work on, such as forehand loop, and use your higher level technique to force rallies where you can work on those shots. For example, serve short backspin and attack any long return with your forehand. If you need blocking practice, push long to them, and block. And so on.At the same time, you should fight to win every one of these points, given the conditions above. You can practice mental focus and hustle against any level of player. You might also want to play some matches against weaker players where you ignore the above two suggestions, just to work on your "win every point" skills, including serves and using your best game, not just what you need to work on. (You might want to do this especially before a big tournament, to focus on your general match playing skills.) Some might argue you should play every match this way, even against much weaker players, but I think you lose an opportunity to practice certain things if you do that all the time.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2578title: December 29, 2016 - What Are Your Main Weapons?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:What are the best weapons in your game, or in the game that you want to develop? Think this over, and perhaps write them down. Then consider this: How do you get these weapons into play? How do you follow-up these weapons to make sure you win the point?If your best weapon is a put-way shot, then you need ways to set up this shot. If your best weapon is a rallying shot, then you need ways to force these types of rallies. If your best weapon is your serve, then you need ways to follow it up, or the serve is wasted. (If you rely on the opponent outright missing against your serve or popping it up over and over, then you are facing weaker players and need to aim for higher competition.)Some players have one overpowering strength that they rely on, such as a big forehand loop. But a big forehand loop doesn't help a lot if you don't have serves, receives, and rallying shots to set it up, and the footwork to get into position for it. Some have multiple strengths, such as a serve and follow, making their game twice as deadly. Decide what yours are (or should be), and develop them into deadly weapons that you set up, use, and follow up on over and over.Ideally, develop three types of overpowering strengths: serve and receive (which start every rally); rallying shots; and attacking/put-away shots. Then go out and terrorize opponents with your triple-threat weapons!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2572title: December 28, 2016 - Coaching and Playing Under the New ITTF Coaching Ruledate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:As of Oct. 1, 2016, the ITTF changed the coaching rule. Before that time, coaching was allowed only between games and timeouts. Now the rule is, "Players may receive advice at any time except during rallies provided play is not thereby delayed."What does this mean for players and coaches? In theory, it means coaches can tell players what to do every point, either by calling it out (perhaps in a language the opposing player or coaches does not know) or signaling. It means a player can look back before each serve and the coach can signal what serve to use. It means that when a coach sees the player is doing something tactically wrong, he can tell the player immediately, rather than waiting until the end of the game or calling a one-time timeout.In practice, it's not that simple. In most cases, calling out advice is risky as the opponent (or coach or friend of the player nearby) may know the language. In many cases, the coach might only know one language, and is so handicapped. So this type of coaching will mostly take place when a ball happens to come by the barrier where the coach is, and the coach can then whisper something to the player. This can, of course, be abused – a player may take a sudden walk around the court, getting close enough to the coach to hear his whispered advice, and will likely get away with it. (But woe be the player who is too transparent, and, say, kicks to ball toward his coach so he can go pick it up!)In reality, except for the serve, table tennis is a game of reacting to an opponent, and trying to over-coach often turns a player from reacting to the opponent to over-anticipating (and therebynotreacting properly to the opponent). So coaches and players should be very careful about coaching during a game on most areas.However, the serve is different. I expect that more and more coaches and players will set up signals whereby the coach can signal in serves. Some coaches will want to do so every serve. I think that's a mistake, as it turns the player into essentially a mindless zombie. Instead, coaches will likely develop signals to emphasize what serves the player shouldfavor. For example, if a player keeps serving deep, and the coach wants him to serve short, he doesn't need to signal every serve; he simply needs a signal that says "serve short more." Or one for "serve long more." Or "more backspin serves." And so on.That doesn't mean the coach won't want to signal (or whisper) other advise, but only sparingly. If a player is, say, playing too much to the backhand, the coach doesn't need to signal each point for him to play more to the forehand or middle; he needs a general signal for this to remind the player.The problem with a player receiving constant coaching during a game is that he will stop thinking for himself, and so always have to rely on the coach. You can't learn to think tactically unless you are thinking tactically, and so a player who relies too much on the coach will grow up to be weak tactically. On the other hand, a player who learns to think for himself, but gets periodic signals – "corrections" – from a coach, can learn to think for himself, especially as he learns to self-correct and learn why the coach wants him to make certain tactical changes.One practical concern is which side of the table the player is on. If the player is on his side, the coach can often whisper advice to him. When he's on the far side, he can signal to him when (with the opposing player's back to him).So what should a player with a match coach do? Before the match, work out signals with the coach. Keep them simple; if you spend your time trying to remember what each signal means, it means you won't be thinking about what you should be thinking about, i.e. tactical thinking. Perhaps a signal about short or long serves (including fast ones, such as down the line); type of serve (forehand pendulum, backhand serve, etc.); service spin (backspin, topspin, sidespin, no-spin); placement (forehand, backhand, middle); and for more (or less) aggressive. These are some of the common things that coaches might want to say to a player in a match. But overuse of even service signals will probably be counter-productive – instead, the player should be making these decisions, with the coach giving occasional input when he thinks a major change is needed.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2565title: December 27, 2016 - Focus on How to Beat Someone, Not On Why You Can’tdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:How often have you played a match against someone who has something that scares you? Strong serves? Strong forehand or backhand? Quick blocks? Heavy push? And so on. Many players get pre-occupied worrying about how to deal with these shots rather than focusing on what they can do to win.For example, if an opponent has a very strong backhand, don’t focus on or worry about their backhand; instead focus on what you want to do to bring your own strong shots out while avoiding theirs. Against a strong backhand player, you have many options. You can attack their forehand; go to the forehand to draw them out of position and then go back backhand, forcing awkward shots; go to the middle and wide backhand (as well as forehand) to force even more awkward shots; keep the ball deep so their backhands aren’t so strong; give them shots that their backhand isn’t so strong against (heavy topspin, heavy backspin, quick shots, etc.); throw them off with varied pace; or use serve and receive to dominate rallies so they don’t get to use their strong backhand (or whatever else their strength is).The same is true of any other strong shot, including serves. If they have a strong serve, focus on how to return it to take away their best follows. So stop worrying, do some analysis, perhaps experiment a bit, and focus on bringing out your strong shots while taking away the opponents!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2557title: December 26, 2016 - Last-Second Changes of Direction on Receivedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Players learn to react to an opponent’s motion as soon as they are committed. But some players commit early, other late. You can often see where an intermediate player is hitting his shot before he even starts his forward swing, while you normally can’t tell against an advanced player until after he’s started his forward swing.Try adding last-second changes of direction to your game, especially when receiving. While it’s valuable at all times, it is when receiving that you’ll get the most bang for your buck by changing the direction at the last second. For example, if you are pushing aim to the backhand, and then, at the last second, as the server is reacting to it already, change and quick push to the forehand. Or do the reverse, aim to the forehand, and as he reacts to that, go quick to the backhand. You’ll be surprised at how often you can mess up the server in this way. At first he’ll likely get caught going the wrong way. Even when he adjusts, he’ll be rushed as he’ll have to wait longer to see where you are going.You can do the same against sidespin-topspin serves, aiming one way, then going the other. It’s one of the best ways to force an opponent to use his weaker side. Just aim to his strong side, then go to the weak side!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2555title: December 25, 2016 - Maximize Coverage For Your Stronger Sidedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Whether you are stronger on the forehand or backhand, you should maximize coverage with your stronger side. Ideally, you’ll be equally strong on both sides, but that is rare. At the very least, most players are stronger on one side in some situations - for example, better on the backhand in fast rallies, better on the forehand when attacking against slower shots.And yet many players do not maximize the coverage of their stronger side. Analyze your game, and decide which side is your stronger side in any given situation. For example, many top players receive short serves better with their backhand, usually with a banana flip. So when they see a short serve coming, they often step over and receive with their backhands, even from the forehand corner. Others may have very strong rallying backhands, and so might cover over half the table with their backhands. Or (more commonly at the higher levels) they might be stronger on the forehand, and so cover more of the table with that.So start training to use your stronger side to cover more of the table in given situations - because using a stronger shot to cover more of the table makes you a stronger player!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2553title: December 24, 2016 - Ask the Distributor!date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:At clubs all across the nation and the world, the same routine goes on all the time - players are constantly asking and talking about equipment. Only ratings are more discussed. (Typical greeting at a club: “What’s your rating? What equipment do you use?”) And it’s true that you can learn a lot by asking others about equipment - and better still, trying out their equipment.But think about it - a distributor might have dozens of sponges and dozens of rackets that might suit your game. The possible combinations can run into the thousands. While you may gain valuable information asking questions, remember that they mostly know what works forthem, and no two players play alike. You need to find what works foryou. You may find this by experimenting, but the probability that someone else at the club just happens to have the perfect racket and sponge combination for you isn’t likely.But there’s an expert out there ready to help - and that’s the equipment expert at the distributor. All of the major ones have someone like this, who has literally tried out every combination of their equipment, and knows just about all there is to know about all of them. Their job is to find a perfect combination for you - because if they don’t, you’ll be going to a rival. Not only that, but each of these distributor “equipment junkies” lives and breathes table tennis equipment, and so it will be his lifelong dream to discuss your equipment needs and find you the perfect combination. He’ll know what questions to ask of your game with the goal of finding you just what you need.So if you aren’t sure yet about what equipment to use, why not contact one of the major distributors andASK? (You can also do this at most major tournaments.)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2552title: December 23, 2016 - Racket Rotation Servedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players understand the importance of using a semi-circular rotation of the racket to create deceptively different spins. For example, with a forehand pendulum serve, the racket goes through a rotation that starts by going down, and then down and sideways, sideways, sideways up, and then up. Depending where the contact is made you get different spins - backspin, sidespin-backspin, sidespin, sidespin-topspin, and topspin.But you can get even more subtle than this. With the above motion, the axis of rotation at the start of the serve is the elbow, with the axis changing to the wrist just before contact. This means you get spin from both elbow and the wrist.Now imagine snapping the wrist so that the tip is going down, but pulling up slightly with the elbow so that the bottom of the racket (near the handle) is moving up, with the axis of rotation in the middle of the blade, i.e. the blade spins about its center. If contact is made near the tip, you get backspin. But if you contact it nearer the handle, you get sidespin or topspin! It won’t be as much spin as with the standard forehand pendulum serve, but the mount of spin isn’t nearly as important as fooling the opponent. In this example, the opponent will see the big downward swing of the racket tip, and will likely instinctively read the serve as backspin - and so you contact it near the bottom, with some combination of sidespin and topspin, and watch the opponent pop the ball up or put it off the end!You can use this same principle with any semi-circular serving motion, though you should first master the standard version. Note that quickness of the motion is more important than the amount of spin - the goal is to trick them into thinking it’s backspin, so exaggerate that motion. And then let loose with this new variation, and watch the looks of disbelief by opponents who were absolutelycertainthe racket was moving down at contact!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2547title: November 28, 2016 - Follow the Elbowdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players are aware that one of the best places to attack is an opponent's middle, i.e. his playing elbow, roughly the mid-point between forehand and backhand. There are multiple reasons for this, as noted in the previous Tip of the Week,Attacking the Middle. Many make the mistake of looking for a chance to attack the middle instead of just attacking it, period. Why wait?However, often a player is told to attack the opponent's middle to set up shots to the corners. This is a highly effective tactic, but unless you do it regularly, it's actually difficult to do correctly. The problem is that after attacking the middle, one of the corners usually opens up – but then you have to almost instantly judge which one that is. If you get it wrong, the opponent often gets an easy shot. Top players are so used to attacking the middle and then going to the corner that opens up that it's instinct – they find it so easily they don't even realize how difficult this is for others.How do you judge which sides opens up? In covering the middle, the opponent has to move sideways to play a forehand or backhand from the middle. That leaves one side open. After the shot, they are usually either slow in returning into position, thereby leaving that side open, or almost as often move too quickly, often still moving as you hit your next shot, and so leave the other side open. You just have to see and react to which side is open.But there's a simpler tactic which anyone can do which is just about as effective and is easier to do – and that's to simply keep going after the middle, i.e. "Follow the Elbow." This is an especially good tactic in fast exchanges, especially backhand ones. All you do is keep punching or looping the ball right at the opponent's elbow, no matter where they are. If they start edging over to cover it, you follow the target and keep going after it. The tactic isn't too effective against super-fast forehand players, but most players are two-winged in fast rallies. Even if they know you are going to go to their middle again, they can't really position themselves for it – all that does is move their elbow, and you simply go for it again.Against such an onslaught to their elbow, many players will just wilt, unable to rally effectively. Have no mercy – keep going at their elbow until they either miss or give you an easy put-away – and then you can go anywhere.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2543title: November 21, 2016 - Getting "In the Zone" by Adapting to Your Opponentdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Every have a match where you were "In the Zone," where the ball seemed to slow down, and you could almost do no wrong? This is relative, of course; an intermediate player "In the Zone" isn't going to compete with a professional, but he would dominate against his normal peers. Here's a good article on the topic:Being in the Zone – Sport’s Holy Grail.There are many articles and books about getting into this "Zone," including ones listed in theSports Psychologylisting I have here. (Dora Kurimay, a table tennis champion, can help with this, and another good one for this specifically is Michael Lardon's "Finding Your Zone" – he's also a former table tennis star.)However, there's a pre-requisite to getting into the zone that has nothing to do with sports psychology. You cannot be "In the Zone" if you are not comfortable with what your opponent is doing. If your opponent does something that you are having trouble with, then you either have to keep him from doing it, or adapt to it. Being "In the Zone" means reacting automatically to what your opponent does, and you can't do that if you are uncomfortable with what he does.Suppose your opponent has a weird inside-out forehand that looks like it's going one way, but goes the other. You can't really be in the zone against something like this if you are constantly going the wrong way. This means you have to adapt to what he's doing. Sometimes this means letting him do the shot simply so you can adjust to it. The more you see it, the more you adapt to it, and the more you can react to it. Once you are able to react to it properly, you are ready to be "In the Zone."The worst thing you can do is to lose a match, and afterwards realize you never adapted to what the opponent was doing. This usually means you only faced it when you weren't ready for it, and so didn't adapt. Sometimes it's best to play right into it, so you know when it's coming, so you can make the adjustment.Here's an example. Many years ago I had to play a 2200 long-pipped blocker, i.e. a "push-blocker," with no sponge under his long pips. Unfortunately, there was no one at my club who played like that or with that surface, and so it had been years since I'd played anything like it. Before the match I realized that if I didn't adapt to his no-sponge long pips, I could lose. But more importantly, I realize thatthe only way I could losewas if I didn't adapt to his long pips. Why? Because I knew that once I adapted to them, I would be "In the Zone," and he would have nothing to threaten me with. So instead of playing to win points, right from the start all I did was rally into his long pips. We had lots of long rallies, and we battled close, but I didn't worry about the score until near the end of the game. Around 8-all, I went after his forehand and middle, and won three straight. The second game was a repeat – again, lots of long rallies. Near the end of that game I figured it was time – and then I played to win the points. I was now completely comfortable against his pips, and I was now "In the Zone." I won easily the rest of the way.There are many other examples. Does your opponent have a very strong backhand? Perhaps play into it intentionally a few points, challenging his strength as you adapt to it so that you'll be comfortable against it when you have to, and then go back to your game. Does he have a spinnier loop then you are used to? Play into it a few times so you can adapt to it, then go back to your game. Does he push heavier than you are used to? Serve backspin into it so you can attack a few so you can adapt. And so on. Sometimes you might challenge the strength and then go to the weakness. For example, after challenging the opponent's strong backhand so you can adapt to it, perhaps counter-attack to his weaker forehand side. You get the best of both worlds – you adapt to his strength, and you play into his weakness.None of this means you should continue to let your opponent play his strengths – you should normally use tactics to avoid them. But if you are going to have to face them, then it's better to adapt to them than not to do so, and adapting to them allows you to enter "The Zone," and suddenly his strengths, when he gets to play them, won't be so scary.So next time you have a match, quickly find out what your opponent does that gives you trouble, and do what it takes to adapt to it. Then play your best game, where you now can be "In the Zone" against whatever your opponent throws at you.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2536title: November 14, 2016 - How to Develop a Quicker Forehanddate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players have sluggish forehands. Some are forced to back up, while others stay at the table but make awkward shots. How can you develop a quicker, more effective forehand?First, it's all about technique and footwork. If you have poor forehand technique, then you will likely struggle with your forehand shots, period. So work on the technique. This might mean working with a coach, but isn't it worth doing that a few times rather than face a lifetime of frustration?Once your technique is relatively solid, you can go about making it quicker, allowing you to make those quicker, more effective shots you see top players do so smoothly. How do you go about doing this?Practice. But not just practice – just as with any other aspect of your game you want to develop, it must be proper practice. In this case I have three drills to recommend for developing that quicker forehand. I swore by these three when I was developing, and they helped me develop a quick forehand, both hitting and looping.Partner blocks or strokes side to side as you alternate forehands and backhands. Your focus is to move side to side smoothly, and play the forehand a little quicker than usual. The reason is if you can do it quickly here, it'll transfer into game situations. I used to drill with a lefty on this drill, allowing me to play into their backhand – my forehand crosscourt, looping quick off the bounce, my backhand down the line. With a righty, you can play into their forehand or backhand.Partner blocks or strokes side to side randomly, you react with forehand or backhand, trying to play the shots a little quicker off the bounce than usual. Don't anticipate in this drill; just react. Watch your partner's racket, and you should be able to see where he's going the instant he starts his forward swing, allowing you to jump on each ball, which should become a habit. This drill develops quicker reactions and shots in game situations, as well as a quick return to ready position after each shot.Hit backhand to backhand with your partner, aggressively, where he randomly picks out one to suddenly go to your forehand, then play out the point. Now you are not only practicing a quick return to ready position after each shot – absolutely necessary in this drill or you'll get clobbered – but a quick move to cover the forehand when the ball goes there. From drill #2 above you should be reacting a little quicker to your partner's shots, so you should be able to cut off those shots to the forehand more quickly than before. As I drill #2, don't anticipate; just react, and jump on each ball as you see where it's going to go, just as you want to do in a match situation.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2530title: November 7, 2016 - Three Ways to Play the Forehanddate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you are a backhand-oriented player, you still need to play forehands. Many have difficulty with this because they stand in a backhand stance, and have difficulty switching to a forehand stance. Even some forehand players, once they play a backhand, go into a backhand stance, and have trouble with their forehand after that. So how do you go from playing a backhand to a forehand? There are three basic ways.Pull Back Leg Back for Forehands. (When we say back leg, we mean the right leg for righties, the left for lefties.) A player in a backhand stance often has his legs either parallel or the back leg actually in front (i.e. a righty has his right leg in front). To play a forehand in this manner, he needs to pull the leg back quickly, rotating the body around, to get into a forehand stance. This is the most standard way, and the choice for most players. However, many backhand-oriented players, especially those who do not train regularly, have great difficulty with this. It's all a matter of training to make it a habit.Play Forehands with a Neutral Stance. This was considered a no-no in the past, but in the modern game, which is faster and more two-winged, most top players learn to play with their feet mostly parallel to the table. This gives them a strong backhand. When playing forehand, if rushed or close to the table, rather than pull the back leg back, they simply rotate the body at the hips and waist. This takes a lot of training, including physical training. But once mastered, it allows players to play a strong two-winged attack without backing up.Play Backhands with a Forehand Stance. This was very common in the past, but less common these days as backhand techniques have advanced and more and more players develop their backhands into strong weapons. If you play a mostly blocking or consistent backhand, then you can do this with a forehand stance, with right leg back (for righties). This allows you to play quick backhands and make a very quick transition to forehand play since you are already in a forehand stance. (Note – this is how I generally play my backhand.)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2525title: November 1, 2016 - How Do You Win and Lose Points?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most players only have a vague idea of how they win and lose points. Ask them how they won or lost most points, and they really don't know. They just have a general idea of their playing style or game plan, and don't really get any feedback on its success, i.e. what is working and what is not.Top players who have played many years generally get a good feeling for this, though not always. But if you want to become a top player, you need to develop this sense of what works and what does not. How do you do that?Videotape yourself playing a few matches. Then watch the video, and keep track of how each point was won or lost, from your perspective. (You can also have a coach do this for you.) Did you win it with your serve (receiver missed it or popped it up), with serve and attack (serve set you up for an attack, though not an easy winner), receive, forehand or backhand loop, forehand or backhand drive, blocking, placement, consistency, pushing, lobbing, or what? Make a chart and keep track, adding columns for each type of thing that wins a point for you as they come up. Also keep track of how many points you won with different serves and receives.When you've done this, you might have a better idea of what works and doesn't work, and with that feedback, you can both develop your game to focus on what works, develop the parts that aren't working, and get a better feel in match play for what is tactically working or not working.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2520title: October 24, 2016 - Winning Cheap Pointsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Cheap points are when you do something seemingly simple, often subtle, and force the opponent into an error. For example, you might push a serve back extra heavy, and the opponent loops into the net. Or, after serving short several times in a row, you serve fast at the receiver's middle, catching him off guard, and again get an easy point. Or a last second-change of direction. Or a suddenly well-placed dead block. There are many possibilities.The problem is that most players are so focused on either ripping winners or keeping the ball in play that they don't develop the instincts to win these cheap points. Most of what they do is predictable, and while they may rip lots of winners and keep the ball in play, so does the opponent.How do you learn to win such cheap points? Experiment, observe the result, and learn. This doesn't mean playing all sorts of weird shots; it means trying out different things and seeing what works - a last-second change of direction, an unexpected change of spin, a change-of-pace block, and so on. These are the type of things that win cheap points for you by your opponent missing or making a weak shot. You can also win cheap points on your serve by throwing in an occasional "trick" serve.Here are some of my favorite ways to win a cheap point:Sudden fast serves, either breaking into wide backhand, no-spin to the middle (receiver's playing elbow), or quick down the line.After several backspin serves, a side-top or no-spin serve, but with a big downward follow through.Quick blocks and other attacks to the opponent's middle.Set up to loop crosscourt from forehand, at the last second rotate the shoulders back and go down the line.Set up to loop crosscourt from the backhand, at the last second whip the shoulders around and go down the line.Backhand loops that go down the line or at the elbow instead of the normal crosscourt ones.Aim a backhand crosscourt, then at the last second bring the wrist back and go down the line.Against short backspin, sudden very aggressive and angled pushes.Aim a push to the right, at the last second drop the racket tip and push to the left. Can be done short or long.Take a shot right off the bounce, throwing opponent's timing off. This can be done against serves or other shots, with quick drives, blocks, or pushes.Dead blocks that mess up opponent's timing. They can be no-spin, or chop blocks and sidespin blocks.Suddenly aggressive dead block, especially if you pin them down on the backhand.Slow spinny loops that drop short, near the net. Opponents often mistime them if they hesitate.No-spin "Dummy" loops. Exaggerate the normal looping motion but use no wrist.When fishing and lobbing, vary the height, placement, and spin of the shots.Place your weak shots. If you have to make a weak return, at least make the opponent move! Perhaps aim one way then go the other to catch the opponent off guard.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2514title: October 17, 2016 - Play Both Weaker and Stronger Playersdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players who want to improve make the mistake of trying to play mostly stronger players. The result is the opponent controls play, and all the player can do is react to the stronger player's shots, or go for wild shots. A player may develop some shots this way, but it'll be hard to develop new shots or to learn how to use them in a game situation.If you are trying to improve you need to both try out new shots that you are developing and to try out new combinations and strategies. If you do this against a stronger player, you probably won't do so well, and you'll probably stop doing it. You won't have any way of knowing if the new shot, combination or strategy may work since the stronger player may win the point simply by being a stronger player against something you are just trying out and are not yet comfortable with.Instead, try out new things against players who are weaker than you. Develop them against these players, in an environment where you can control play a little more (since you are the stronger player), and where you can see if the new things might work. Don't worry about winning or losing – this is practice – as you will undoubtedly lose sometimes when trying out something new, even against a weaker player. (Imagine how bad you'd lose in this case against a stronger player!) When your new techniques begin to work against a weaker player, then it's time to try them out against your peers and stronger players.Example: suppose you want to develop your loop against backspin. The best way to do this is to serve backspin, and loop the pushed return. A stronger player may flip the serve, push short, quick push to a corner, or push extremely heavy – and you won't be able to develop the shot very well. A weaker player would be more likely to give you a ball that you can loop, which is what you need until the shot is more developed. You need to both develop the shot and your instincts on when to use it, how to follow it up, etc. When you can do it against a weaker player, then it's time to try it out against tougher competition.Everyone wants to play against stronger players, and you do need to play stronger players so they can push you to play at a higher level. But often it helps to play weaker players so you can develop the weapons you'll want to use against those stronger players.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2512title: October 11, 2016 - Taking the Shot Versus Letting it Happendate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:A common thinking problem when playing is thinking of an attacking shot as "going for a shot." This is a mistake – it leads to a deep-held belief that you are going for something risky and therefore inconsistent, which leaves you with a lack of confidence in the shot, which makes you hesitant, which leads to inconsistency.Instead, think of any attacking shot as just another shot, no different than a push. You aren't "going for a shot," you are simply letting it happen by doing something you've probably done thousands of times before. If you haven't, then doing it a thousand times is your next assignment – it's calledpractice. Ideally, practice the shot with multiball training until it is so second nature that when it's time to do so in a real rally, it will still be second nature. Then do it in practice sessions with a partner, then practice games, and finally in real matches in tournaments or leagues.Even if the shot is not yet second nature, you should still believe you will make it every time if you want to maximize your consistency.Knowthat you can make any shot that you reasonably might try. Don't force a shot; just let the shots that you've practiced happen, and they will happen far more consistently than if you force them or think that you are "going for a shot."There's a simple test of whether you have the right mentality when attacking. You should besurprisedwhen you miss, because you should be so sure you can make the shot that any other outcome doesn't enter you mind, leading to that surprise if you miss.All of this is true whether you are attacking consistently or trying to end the point. You aren't "going for a shot." You are simply doing what you trained to do, what you know you can do, and what you expect to do. And if you do happen to miss, just shake your head in disbelief, make the needed adjustment, andknowthat you'll never miss again.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2506title: October 3, 2016 - Returning Smashes: Reacting and Racket Anglesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:How often have you given up on a ball that your opponent is about to smash or loop-kill? And how many times have you gotten your racket on the ball against an opponent’s smash or hard-hit ball, only to put it off the end, further re-enforcing the futility of trying to win such points? It happens all the time. And it’s a crime.Some will no doubt argue they don’t have the fast reflexes of a pro to return smashes. That’s a myth. You have fast enough reflexes, just not the properreactions. A pro doesn’t see an incoming smash and react with incredible reflexes; he sees an opponent’s forward swing coming toward the ball, and reacts well before contact to where he sees the ball must be going. It’s that big head start he gets that makes him seem to have supernatural reflexes. He’s both moving into position and setting up for his return before the opponent even hits the ball. How do you learn to do this? By observing opponents and trying to read where their shots will go from their forward swing. If you do this regularly, it becomes a natural habit, and you’ll start reacting faster and faster. Most top players are barely aware of doing this since they’ve been doing it for so long, often since they were little kids, and so it’s all subconscious reactions.But once you’ve reacted to the ball, you still have to return it. Here’s something you should live by when facing a smash or loop-kill: If you can get your racket on the ball, you should get it back. Unlike a loop, a smash doesn’t have much spin, and so the racket angle needed for returning a smash is easy to anticipate. All you have to do is practice getting the right angle, and lo and behold, if you touch it, it’ll go back. The same is actually true against a loop-kill as well – the racket angle needed to return one is almost the same for all, so once you get that angle, you can return them. (It’s often the topspin jump off the table that gives many players first against a strong loop.)How do you practice all of this? That sort of answers itself; you practice it by having an opponent practice his smash (or loop-kill) while you block, counter, or fish. (No lobbing for this exercise.) At first have them go to one spot so you can practice getting the right racket angle until it’s second nature. Then have them move the smash about, and you watch their swing and try to see where their smash is going. Keep your shots deep; if you put the ball high and short, you have little time to react and they’ll have extreme angles. Soon you’ll be returning these “put-aways” like a pro – at least some of the time.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2500title: September 26, 2016 - How to Play Against a Player with a Coachdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Imagine playing a tournament match. It’s you versus your opponent in this gladiatorial combat, with both players alone out there, on their own. Except . . . that’s not what happen when your opponent has a coach. It’s no longer you versus your opponent, it’s two against one, and you are the one. How can you best handle this? Here are some tips. (Note that at the time I’m writing this, USATT had just rejected, at least for the moment, the ITTF’s new coaching rule, whereby coaching is allowed at any time between points. If played under ITTF rules, where an opponent can receive coaching between points, some of the tactics change, especially #5 below.)Ignore the coach. If you let it get into your head and bother you, that will likely hurt you more than any golden words of advice the coach might say.Get your own coach. It evens the playing field, both tactically and psychologically. Often all you need is a sounding board between games, and even the appearance of having a coach can affect the opponent.Take advantage of it psychologically. You are thinking for yourself, while your opponent isn’t. This should give you confidence. Remember that the coach only gets to talk to the player between games and once for a timeout (assuming they are not playing under the ITTF’s coaching rule where coaches can coach between points), and so the rest of the time your opponent is out there alone, just like you. While he’s thinking, “What did my coach tell me to do?”, you are thinking, “What should I do tactically?” You have the superior thinking pattern here as you are thinking for yourself, and better able to adjust to changes in the game.Watch what your opponent does at the start of a new game and adjust. You figured out what your opponent is doing on your own; will your opponent be able to adjust to you without his coach?Play differently at the start of a new game. If you do this, your opponent, often a kid (or adult) who's just been told how to play against what you did in thepreviousgame, will likely fall apart in frustration, since the tactics he was just given no longer work. You can literally alternate tactics each game. It's one of the reasons it's important to have a "B" game. This is probably the most important tactic when playing a player with a coach. Here’s an actual example of how I used this in a tournament match.In the first game, I mostly served backspin and looped his pushes. On his serve, I mostly forced rallies, often backhand-to-backhand, and out-steadied him. I won the game, but it was relatively close – the opponent was rated lower than me, but was competitive. I knew his coach would tell him to quick-push my serves to wide corners to stop my forehand attack, and to attack my middle in rallies. So in the second game I switched to serving mostly short side-top and no-spin serves (all disguised as backspin) that he proceeded to quick-push ten feet off the table. In rallies I went on the forehand attack and feasted on his balls to my middle. He got very frustrated and I won the second easily. In the third I went back to my first-game tactics and won all the points at the start. The coach called a timeout, but when they returned I switched to my second-game tactics, and went up 10-0. (I played a lobbing point there and sort of gave him a point, and then won 11-1.) After the match the poor kid threw a tantrum, blaming his coach for the loss.So next time you play a match against someone with a coach, take advantage of the situation!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2496title: September 19, 2016 - Five Serves That EVERYONE Should Masterdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Here are five serves that any serious player should have. Some you might use regularly; others you might use sparingly for a few free points each game. Many long-time players, even top ones, continually handicap themselves by not having the needed variations that would finish off an opponent – and often they don’t even realize it, and so give away a few points every game that could be “freebies.” Since there are three long serves (#1 below), and backspin/no-spin is two serves (#2 below), there are reallyeightserves everyone should have. But I like to group the deep serves together as “The Three Primary Long Serves” players will remember them when practicing serves, and when playing a match.The Three Primary Long Serves, served from the backhand corner, often forehand pendulum serves.Deep crosscourt breaking sidespin servethat breaks away from the receiver (to the wide backhand if a righty serving to a righty). These serves throw off a receiver’s timing and often leave them lunging for the ball. (This doesn’t mean you should only do deep sidespin serves that break away from the receiver, but they are generally trickier to receive than ones that break into the receiver.) At the intermediate levels, a serve into the forehand that breaks away from the receiver can cause great difficulty, especially if not over-used. At the more advanced levels, that’s not effective and so breaking serves are mostly into the wide backhand.Fast no-spin at the elbow. This serve is put in the net so often it’s a mystery every player doesn’t develop this serve. It’s the single most effective “trick” serve up to about 2200 level (which is pretty advanced) – almost a guaranteed point or two every game if done properly. Against players who cover the middle with their forehand the serve might be more effective into the wide backhand, or down-the-line if a righty serving to a lefty (or vice versa).Fast down-the-line(to a righty’s forehand). Also effectivecrosscourtif served righty to lefty or vice versa. Many receivers try to cover more of the table with their forehand against deep serves, and so are vulnerable to sudden fast serves to the forehand. It also draws them out of position for the next shot. For righty vs. lefty or vice versa, there’s a big angle into the forehand, so it can be even more effective unless the receiver shades over to cover that wide forehand – in which case they may be vulnerable to a fast down-the-line serve.Short backspin/no-spin to the middle. By going to the middle, receivers have no extreme angles, and the server has less ground to cover on the follow-up. By mixing in backspin and no-spin, receivers often put the backspin in the net, and pop the no-spin up. It’s important that these serves be very low to the net, and bounce twice on the far side if given the chance. If serving no-spin, use a vigorous motion as if serving with spin – you must sell it as if it’s a backspin. If serving backspin, use less arm and more wrist so receiver will see less motion and think it’s no-spin.Backhand-type sidespin from the middle, served short to forehand or long to backhand. Many players are more comfortable receive short serves with their backhands, and have even more trouble with backhand-type sidespin short to the forehand, which breaks away from them, and can be awkward to receive since to compensate for the sidespin they have to aim down the line, which is trickier with the forehand on a short ball. By serving from the middle of the table, it gives the server an angle into the short forehand that cause even more trouble, while putting the server in perfect position for the follow-up shot, which usually comes to the forehand. Receivers often “cheat” and move in to cover this serve, even receiving it with their backhand – so be ready to use the same motion and suddenly serve out to the backhand, catching them off guard.Sidespin-topspin serve that looks like backspin. This is the serve many top players use to serve weaker players off the table. Their racket tip is moving down at contact, so the serve looks like backspin, but the racket is rotating about its center, and so the bottom is moving sideways and up – and so the serve is side-top. Receivers often push it, and it pops up or goes off the end. Against stronger players, if you over use this serve they can attack it – so don’t over use it, unless you are a counter-driving player. Use it sparingly, and it’s free points.Both types of sidespin. Some receivers are good against one type, not the other. Many players can only serve one type of sidespin effectively. Not only should you be able to do both, you should have motions where the receiver doesn’t know which you are doing until you start your forward swing. The most common method is forehand pendulum and reverse pendulum serves. But you can also do backhand regular and reverse serves and forehand tomahawk and reverse tomahawk serves.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2489title: September 12, 2016 - The More Two Players Drill Together the Better They Drill Togetherdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the keys to improving is getting a good practice partner. Usually these are two players who are roughly the same level. But it's more important that they both want to improve, are willing to work together, and are regular to train on a regular basis. The more they train together the more used to each other they get, and the better each plays in these drills. This leads to both players' levels escalating up – an upward spiral to excellence! (Here's my article onHow to Play and Practice with Weaker Players.)I want to emphasize how much better you play when you drill with someone regularly – you get used to their shots, and your own shots become more and more natural and consistent, as well as more powerful. Some might think this is artificial, since you are playing against the same player and shots, which isn't what happens in tournaments or leagues. But the key is how much this type of drilling develops your foundation. (This doesn’t mean you only practice with one player, but if you are able to practice with multiple players, the more you hit with them the better you’ll drill with them.)Players still need to practice with and play others with different styles, especially matches – that's imperative - but drilling with a good partner (or partners) develops the foundation that's so important to developing your game.Once you find someone to train with regularly, take turns with the drills. But remember that in any drill,bothplayers are doing the drill. If one player is doing a footwork drill to the other's block, then the other is doing a blocking drill. Players not only need to learn to move and attack, but also to control an opponent's shots. And remember even blocking is a footwork drill – you need to step to the ball, not just reach.Don't forget to get a box of balls and do some multiball training! (Here's my article onMultiball Training.) Multiball training makes up about 1/3 of the training of world-class players.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2483title: September 5, 2016 - Looping Slightly Long Ballsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players have great difficulty looping slightly-long balls, especially with the forehand. These are usually serves or pushes that go only a little bit off the table. Most players push them back – and since the ball is relatively deep, they can’t get a good angle nor can they rush the opponent with a quick push, and so their return is ineffective. The solution, of course, is to loop these balls. (And the nice thing here is that when you read these balls right, they are easy to loop very aggressively.) How do you learn to do that?Here are three tips for learning to forehand loop against slightly-long balls. (Tips 2 and 3 apply to the backhand loop as well.)You need to be very close to the table, with your head directly over the end-line. This allows you to look down on the ball, making it much easier to see if the ball is long, as well as easier to time it.Realize that you can loop a ball even if it is actually slightly short, i.e. the second bounce would be on the end-line or even an inch or so inside. You simply stroke aggressively over the table with a slightly upward stroke. Once you realize this, you’ll see that balls that seemed unloopable are actually very loopable. (You can go over the table even more with the backhand loop, by using more wrist. In fact, a backhand banana flip is essentially a loop done over the table.) Some worry that they’ll hit their hand on the table, but if you are aware of where the table is, you just stroke slightly behind or above it. If you can contact a small, moving ball, how hard is it to avoid hitting a large stationary object? (In 40 years of play, I don’t recall ever hitting my hand on the table while looping.)Practice!How do you do this? Have someone feed you multiball backspin where the ball is only slightly long, or do it live where you serve and your partner pushes the ball back slightly long. You’ll have to adjust to each shot as some will be longer, some shorter, including some too short to forehand loop. Get your head over the ball (see #1 above), recognize that you can loop balls that you didn’t think you could before (#2 above), and loop those that are loopable. At first, if you think the ball is unloopable,let it go. You’ll be tempted to adjust and either push or flip, but letting it go is the only way to get true feedback. Watch it and ask yourself, “Could I have looped that ball?” Often the answer will be yes. Eventually, with practice, you’ll be able to judge this, and then you can stop letting the ball go, and practice either looping the loopable ones, and pushing or flipping the shorter ones.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2477title: August 29, 2016 - Keep a Notebookdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Do you keep a table tennis notebook? I did for years, and I recommend you do as well. I used a steno notebook. From front to back, I would take notes on my own game - what I was working on, what drills I was doing, what worked and didn't work in matches, etc. On the other side - back to front - I kept tactical notes on opponents. When the side on me was filled up (it usually went first), I'd get a new notebook for my game and start fresh. At tournaments, I'd bring past notebooks (with the ever-growing notes on opponents), and would be ready against any opponent I'd ever played against.After doing this for perhaps a decade, I realized that I'd been doing it so long that notes about opponents I’d played were all in my head, and that I no longer needed to consult my notes to remember them – but the very act of writing them down made it easier to remember. I eventually retired my notebook in regard to tactical notes against opponents – though I sometimes would write down the notes as a memory aid, and then put them aside – but for years afterwards I kept notes on my own development and what I needed to do to improve.These days you might use a smart phone for such notes, or go old school with a steno notebook. It still works!While I no longer have a notebook for my game, I still keep notes on regular opponents of players I coach, which I jot down at tournaments and later type up in my coaching files on my computer. When I show up at major tournaments I bring these top secret printouts.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2471title: August 22, 2016 - Shorten Stroke When Receivingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Returning serves is all about ball control. In a rally, the incoming shot is usually more predictable than a serve, which normally has a much wider range of variation – topspin, sidespin, backspin, at all speeds and placements. To return serves, where the incoming ball is far less predictable, it helps to shorten the stroke to maximize control. This cuts down on power, but the shorter backswing gives you more control. (Just as with other strokes, the backswing and follow-through should still be about the same length.) The exception here is against a deep serve where you read the ball well, and so may use a normal loop stroke.Watch the top players, especially against short serves. Do they rip the ball when receiving? Only occasionally, and when they do it’s because of their extremely high level of play, or because the opponent made an error with their serve (a slightly long or slightly high short serve, or a “surprise” deep serve that doesn’t catch the receiver off guard). Whether they are pushing (short or long) or flipping, it’s all about consistency, control, variation, and deception. And for that, they shorten their swing and gain in all four categories.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2465title: August 15, 2016 - How to Deal with Nervousness and Play Your Best: Magic, Best Match, Tacticsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Recently a player asked me how to deal with nervousness in a match. I’ve written articles on the topic, and there are a number of techniques for dealing with this – as I pointed out to the players, different methods work for different players. The player asked me, “What doyoudo?” And so here are my methods for dealing with nervousness – and it has a 100% success rate. I may not play well in a match, but I haven’t had a problem with nervousness in many decades. Plus when I follow these three simple things, I almost always play my best. Here’s my personal three-part technique.I pretend my racket is a magic wand and I’m a magician. When I’m out there, I can do magic and make the ball do what I want it to do. I’ll think of myself as Jan-Ove Waldner, who’s often been called a magician at the table, and so have complete faith I can do the same, whether I’m serving, receiving, or rallying.I remember my best matches. Often I’ll think back to perhaps the best match I ever played, when I beat Rey Domingo (2500 player), where the ball seemed to move in slow motion and everything I did worked – looping, smashing, blocking, receive, etc. – and I won easily. There was magic in that match, so all I have to do is recapture that magic and remember what it felt like.I think about tactics. Your mind can’t think about two things at the same time, so if I’m focused on tactics, I can’t be nervous. Tactics is how youapplythe magic from the two items above.So, are you a magician? Have you had matches where you played great, the ball seemed to move in slow motion, and there was magic in the air? Are you focused on tactics when you play? This is what works for me.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2460title: August 8, 2016 - Three Weapons: The Triple B'sdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:You have three weapons in table tennis - your Body, your Brain, and your Bat. The last is the least important. You can go to any club and try out others rackets and find the right fit, and you're done in one night. (Sorry, Equipment Junkies.) But the others take years to develop.Your body is second most important. At the higher levels, this becomes increasingly important. You can't throw yourself into shot after shot like an Olympian without having at least some minimal physical fitness. And yet there are players who play at a very high level who would never be mistaken for Olympians. And how do they do this? They use their most important asset.Your brain is your most important asset in table tennis. It controls everything you do, either consciously or subconsciously. Consciously it decides how often you practice, what you practice, and how hard you practice. It makes the strategic long-term decisions on how to develop your game, and the short-term tactical decisions that make the most of what you have. Subconsciously it controls (or should control) all your shots from the serve to the actual strokes and racket angles. (That's why you train, so you can do these things automatically, i.e. subconsciously.) Table tennis is rightfully called "chess at light speed." It is the brainiest of sports.Are you making full use of your brain?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2442title: June 27, 2016 - Inside-Out Forehand Floppy Wrist Flipdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When an opponent serves short to the forehand, many players reach in and return it with a nearly stiff wrist, and invariably go crosscourt with a forehand flip. Most players do this "Asian style," i.e. using the forearm to power the shot. This gives consistence and power, but less deception than the "European style" wrist flip. (The "Asian style" and "European style" monikers are from decades ago; these days many Europeans do it "Asian style" and vice versa, and many can do both ways.) To do this, approach the ball like any other flip. But at the last second, bring the wrist back, and brush the ball more on the inside (i.e. the back-left side of the ball, if you are right-handed). This puts the ball down the line, while your opponent has probably already moved to cover the opposite corner. The wrist must be very loose to do this shot. Advanced players can even sidespin the ball back with a right-to-left motion (for right-handers). Now, the next time you're at the club, you too can tell others that you now have the inside-out forehand floppy wrist flip. (Say that fast ten times. Another table tennis joy!)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2436title: June 20, 2016 - Always Have at Least Two Optionsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players have multiple options for most situations, but only one for some. For example, against a deep, spinny serve to the backhand, many players will only backhand drive it crosscourt. Or against a backspin serve to the backhand will almost always push it crosscourt. (Crosscourtitis is a curse many players have – there is such a thing as down the line, and you should learn to use it.)When you have only one option off something the opponent does, then the opponent no longer has to worry about anything but that one option. And since a player with only one option usually only has that one option because he's not particularly comfortable with the incoming shot, it usually means the one option he uses isn't very strong. But even if it is, it loses its effectiveness when the opponent knows it's coming.Even if the opponent isn't a "thinking" opponent, i.e. one who figures out opponent's weaknesses (such as predictability), most players are instinctive, and subconsciously pick up on these things. They may not realize it at the time, but they often are reacting to this predictableness.So examine your game, and find places where you generally do the same thing over and over. It's possible that this works against some players, or even most players your level – but it probablydoesn'twork against stronger players, and presumably they are the ones you are hoping to learn to beat. So make sure that in every situation, you have at least two options.Here's an example. During my playing career I often liked to give big breaking sidespin serves deep to the backhand, so that the ball would break to my right, away from the righty's backhand. Most would reach for the ball and make moderately aggressive shots to my backhand – but I'd already be over there, just waiting for this shot with my forehand. The ones that gave me trouble would either take it down the line – often doing so a bit more quickly and catching me – or would simply mix in a chop now and then, which would completely throw me off, since I was generally a step back, waiting for that topspin return.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2431title: June 13, 2016 - The Difference Between a Drop Shot and a Short Pushdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Are these the same things? Almost. A drop shot typically is made as short as possible, and is usually used against a chopper caught off the table. The goal here is to keep the ball as short as possible so that the defender either can't get to it (an "ace"!), or is lunging to get it, and either can't make a good return or recover for the next shot. It should also be low, both so the defender can't run in and hit it in, and because a higher ball stays in the air longer and so gives the opponent more time to react to it. (You can also drop shot against an off-table lobber with a dead block or chop block, though that's more difficult to keep short.)A short push against an attacker's serve is actually more effective if it isn't too short, but short enough so that it would bounce twice if given the chance. The problem here is that the attacker is usually at the table, and so dropping the ball very short won't catch him out of position unless he's very short or immobile. And if he's in position for the shot, the shorter ball is both easier to attack with a flip than the slightly longer one, and easier to drop short.There are always exceptions. Against a very fast-footed defender that you can't really catch with a drop shot, you might not want to drop the ball too short as it just gives him easy balls to pick hit, especially with a running backhand smash. And against an attacker who likes to serve and step back a bit, looking for a long return, an extra-short drop shot might be effective. But as a general rule, use drop shots against choppers, and short pushes against attackers.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2424title: June 6, 2016 - What to Focus on to Improvedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:At different levels, players need to focus on different things to improve. Here's a rundown.Beginners: Fundamentals, Fundamentals, Fundamentals! I can't get any more specific than that. Develop those fundamentals until you can do them in your sleep –strokes, footwork, serve, and receive. Work with a coach to develop them, find players to practice with, and drill, drill, drill!Advanced Beginner: Playing Style. At this point you have at least semi-mastered the basic fundamentals, and should be looking to develop a playing style. But keep harping on those Fundamentals, Fundamentals, Fundamentals!Intermediate: You now have a playing style and have somewhat mastered the fundamentals. Now you should be really honing your playing style, as in what shots you should do and when. Your serve and receive game should directly be setting up your game. You should be figuring out what you win and lose on, and work to get rid of weaknesses while making your strengths overpowering. But guess what? You still are not advanced, and so you need to continue to focus on those Fundamentals, Fundamentals, Fundamentals!Advanced: You have mastered the fundamentals, though (brace yourself) you should continue to work on them as long as you want to improve – the more consistent they are, the better you will be. But you also need to really develop all parts of your game so that you are the master of any situation and against any style. You need to constantly examine your game and your matches and figure out what you are winning and losing on, and train to overcome any weaknesses while continuing to develop overpowering strengths. You have fewer rivals now – you've left most past ones behind – so at this point you should be studying rivals to find specific ways to defeat them.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2419title: May 31, 2016 - How to Cover a Short Ball to the Forehanddate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:These days many players try to receive these with their backhands, often using abackhand banana flip. And there's nothing wrong with doing that. However, you'll run into problems if you can't also flip return these with your forehand – an opponent might use the same motion and either serve short to the forehand or long to the backhand, and unless you have world-class feet, you aren't going to be covering both with your backhand. So learn to return these shots with your forehand as well, with flips and pushes.The key is stepping in properly. For right-handers, that means stepping in with the right foot as far in as needed. Balance is key, so keep your left arm out in the opposite direction, like a fencer doing an "en garde."But you can't really learn this just by doing it when it's needed; you need to systematically practice it. This means:Shadow practicing the shot until it's second nature. Perhaps even put a mark on the floor under the table where the right foot should go, and another where it should be in your regular stance, and then move back and forth, while also shadow-stroking a flip or push when you step in.Practicing it with a partner or coach. Have him serve short to your forehand, or you serve short and he drops it short there, and then you can step in to practice the shot. Even better, do it with multiball, where the coach/practice partner alternates one ball short to the forehand (usually backspin or no-spin), another somewhere else (either random, or perhaps long to the backhand).Then do it in game situations. Perhaps play games where both players have to serve short to the forehand, so both get practice on this.Once you have confidence in receiving short balls with the forehand, you can do so either forehand or backhand, depending on the situation. And if you have a good forehand, you'll find that you might even want to receive with the forehand sometimes against short balls to the middle or even backhand, as it puts you in perfect position to follow with a big forehand!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2415title: May 23, 2016 - Contact Point on the Forehanddate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players lose power on their forehand because they contact the ball too much in front of the body. This means they aren't really rotating into the ball with maximum efficiency – instead, as they are about to contact the ball, they are using mostly arm, which is moving forward while the body lags behind.Instead, try contacting the ball more to the side of the body, by your right leg (for righties). Imagine there's a rod going through the top of your head, and circle the rod, as Ma Long does in this48-sec video. By doing this you'll naturally rotate into the shot, getting maximum power and efficiency. This is true for both looping and regular drives.Note that the goal here isn't just to get lots of power; it also leads to better control since you'll be getting the same amount of power (speed and spin) but with less effort. The more effort you have to put into a shot, the less control, so develop efficient shots where you minimize effort while maximizing power.Here are the forehand contact points for these players – or choose your favorite player and Google that player's name along with forehand loop pictures.Ma LongXu XinFan ZhendongZhang JikeDimitrij OvtcharovTimo BollJoo SaehyukLiu ShiwenDing NingZhu Yuling===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2408title: May 16, 2016 - Depth Control on Serves with CBSdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When trying to serve shorter, many players slow down their swing, and when trying to serve long they speed up their swing. Both are mistakes – that'snothow you control depth or even ball speed."Serving is a violent motion," said two-time (and soon to be five-time) U.S. Men's Champion and future long-time U.S. Men's Team Coach Dan Seemiller at a training camp in the late 1970s – and those words have always stuck with me. If you want to maximize the spin, you maximize the racket speed. (You do this with smooth acceleration, but that's another topic.) If you want to maximize the speed, you also maximize the racket speed (at least as fast as you can make it and keep it on the table).So how do you adjust the depth? Not by changing the racket speed, which should always reach a maximum around contact, but by three things: the grazing contact; where the ball bounces on your side of the table; and the spin.If you barely graze the ball, you get two things: more spin and less speed. This means a shorter serve (i.e. one that would likely bounce two or more times on the far side if given the chance). As you sink the ball a bit more into the sponge, you get more speed and so the ball goes deeper. You also lose a little spin – though not as much as you'd think. More of your energy now goes into speed and so you lose some spin, but you also gain some spin from the rebounding of the sponge, since you've sunk the ball slightly into it at an angle.And so you can control the depth primarily by how much you graze the ball. Want it to go short? Graze it finely (and get more spin as well), and the ball will travel slower, and so land shorter. Want it to go longer? Sink it a bit more into the sponge.You also control depth by where it bounces on your side of the table. If the first bounce is near the net, you'll tend to get a shorter serve. If it's nearer your own end-line, then the ball has a long way to go to get to the net – 4.5 feet – and so will likely bounce deeper. Most top players like to serve the ball so the first bounce is as close to their own end-line as possible while still barely going short (with the second bounce on the far side, given the chance, right on the end-line or sometimes just a touch past it).You also control depth with spin – backspin will make it bounce shorter, topspin longer. A good sidespin serve can also make the ball go shorter as it curves the ball sideways, keeping it over the table rather than bouncing out.You also can keep the ball shorter by serving it low over the net – but that's a given.Alwaysserve low to the net. You also can get a "shorter" serve by serving crosscourt, where you have more table, instead of down the line.So learn to serve with that "violent" motion, and vary the depth with your contact, first bounce, and spin. It's easy to remember – Contact, Bounce, Spin = CBS! (After practicing your serves, you have my permission to go watch TV.)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2402title: May 9, 2016 - Move In to Cut Off the Angles with Quick Blocksdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:A common problem when blocking (both forehand and backhand) is to cover the wide angles by stepping (or worse, reaching) sideways, and letting the ball come to you. While you do, of course, have to move sideways to cover these shots, a key part is movingin, and catching the ball off quick off the bounce. By moving both sideways and in, you can do the following:Catch the ball before it has a chance to move even wider, which would force you to cover even more court;Make a more aggressive block, which is easier to do when moving in than when moving sideways;Stay in position since you don't have to move as much sideways, so you will be more ready for the next shot;Rush the opponent by taking the ball quicker;Angle the opponent right back. And since you have the potential for this wide angle, if your opponent over-reacts to cover it, you can go the other way, forcing your opponent to cover a lot of ground.How do you do all this? By stepping in and sideways with the near foot. On blocks to your left (the backhand for a righty), step sideways and in with your left foot. On blocks to the right, step in and sideways with the right foot. In both cases recover quickly by stepping back.So when your opponent is attacking at wide angles, learn to cut off those angles by stepping in, and turn a potential weakness into a strength as you turn the tables on the opponent with your own aggressive, quick-angled blocks.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2397title: May 2, 2016 - React to Opponent's Swingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When a player hits the ball very hard at a top player, often the top player often effortlessly returns these shots as if he has reflexes far beyond those of normal people. This isn't really true. In fact, in non-table tennis things, where he hasn't trained for many years, he might have only average reflexes. And yet he seems to react instantly to these smashes and loop kills. How does he do this?From years of training, a top player develops fast reactions to things they train for. You could argue they have faster reflexes in table tennis and be correct, but only for those things they have trained for.But there's a second thing going on here. Most players barely react to an opponent's shot until the ball is coming toward them, or at most at the last second as the opponent hits the ball. But the reality is that the huge majority of the time you can judge where the ball is going and how fast almost the instant the opponent starts his forward swing. If you watch top players react to smashes and loop kills, watch how they begin to move into position as the opponent begins that forward swing – it's almost as if they know where the ball is going to be hit – because they do. (Not consciously, of course; it's all trained subconscious, i.e. muscle memory.)How can you do this? It's all about observing the opponent, and learning to react to his movements. Just as you learn to subconsciously react to an opponent's spin based on his movements, you should learn to make the connection between an opponent's swing and the direction the ball will go, as well as its speed, spin, trajectory, etc., so that reacting to it becomes second-nature. You may have to observe this consciously at first, but soon it becomes a subconscious habit.For example, you can read much about the direction an opponent is about go by watching his shoulders. So be aware of the opponent's shoulders, and you will develop the proper reactions to his shots, reacting faster and faster. It's not about having faster reflexes; it's about developing proper reactions that just make youappearto have fast reflexes.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2391title: April 25, 2016 - Clean Your Racketdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:It's a simple concept –keep your inverted sponge rubber clean!!! It doesn't take much play for the surface to gather dust and lose some of its grippiness. It may not seem like much since it's a gradual process, but it really can make a difference – though often players don't notice it. (Related to this is that you should get new sponge periodically – the surface wears down and the sponge gradually loses its bounciness. Since I play 6-7 days/week, I change both sides every month; others who don't play as much may go six months or even a year, though the latter is a bit long if you want to have lively, spinny shots.) Here's my three-part recommendaton:Wash it off with water before every session. The simplest way is to wet a corner of a towel (and you do have a towel when you play to wipe away sweat and clean your racket, right?), and wipe it off with that. Then wipe the water away and dry the racket with a dry part of the towel.A few times each game simply breathe on the sponge's surface, and then wipe it on your pants or towel. This gets rid of gathering dust.At the start of serious competitions, and perhaps once a week otherwise, use rubber cleaner to really clean it off.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2385title: April 18, 2016 - Shot Awareness in Practicedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:What you do in practice you will do in matches. Therefore, you should be aware of the placement of your shots in practice drills, both direction and depth. This gives you feedback on your accuracy so you can make adjustments. Without this feedback you can't really improve your ball control and improve your accuracy.When you play a match, your attacks and blocks should normally go deep to the wide corners or the opponent's middle (roughly playing elbow). Long pushes should also go very deep, mostly to the corners. When I tell players to do this, they often say that they are just trying to get the ball on the table, and that they can't control it well enough to really aim for these spots. Exactly!!! But if you do this in practice, your shots will become more accurate, you will be able to go to these three spots, and it will become a habit. But only if you become aware of your shots in practice so that you can make constant adjustments as you strive for better accuracy.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2379title: April 11, 2016 - How to Do Demonstrationsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Suppose you have a large gathering and you are asked to do a demonstration/exhibition? Here are some pointers on how to do agreatone.Bring needed equipment. Besides the obvious table and balls, you might want to have spare rackets for players from the audience, barriers, boxes of balls (to demonstrate multiball), ball pickup nets, and a scoreboard. You might also want to bring any props you might use - mini- or over-sized rackets, for example. Bring flyers about local table tennis, especially coaching programs if it's for kids.Introduce yourself and your partner. Then give a short talk about the sport. Keep it short - you don't want to bore them. I typically ask them (with a show of hands) how many have played table tennis before; have been to a table tennis club; own their own racket; knew that table tennis was an Olympic sport; and knew that the best players train 6-8 hours/day and make over a million dollars per year. By asking for a show of hands, you get audience participation, which you want. I often end some of the questions with showing of hands of those too embarrassed to raise their hand either time (and I often slyly raise my hand). If you aren't good at public speaking,practice!!!When I first became a coach and had to lecture to groups, I took a class on public speaking, and spent hours practicing by talking to my dog and the dryer. (It makes it more realistic if you have something alive or moving to practice to.)Make sure to talk about local table tennis opportunities! Here's a good time to give out flyers.Give a short demo - again, keep it short. Make sure to have a partner who can rally with you. Then demo the forehand, the backhand, looping, and lobbing, giving a short explanation for each. You can also do chopping if one of you can do that and the other can attack them consistently. You can also give a short demo on serves, showing how a backspin ball can come back into the net, for example. Let it be known that at the end you'll let them try to return the serves.Do an exhibition. It's not a real game; you want spectacular rallies. I like to start by telling the audience that a terrible thing has happened, that my partner - after years of getting coaching from me - has gotten a big head, and thinks he/she can beatme. Then we have a challenge match to 11 points. Neither of us use our spin serves, though I'll throw in a lot of spectacular high-toss serves and maybe a few fast ones, but nothing deceptive. Then rally! Lobbing is best, but don't overdo it or it gets a bit redundant - and perhaps save the best lobbing points for toward the end. (I often fall to the ground and lob while lying and sitting on the floor.) You can play the exhibition "straight," with just good shots, or do more humorous trick shots, as I often like to do, where I pull out the big racket, the mini-racket, a clipboard, do 50-foot serves, blow the ball back, and argue with the umpire.Finish with audience participation. I find the best way is to let the audience line up and try to return serves - two misses and they out (and they'll usually race to the end of the line to try again). Be flamboyant - serve with sidespin, put your racket on the table, and move to where the ball should go and catch it. Or serve backspin, and as you do so, tell them, "Don't go into the net!" I often ask if they want "Speed or Spin," and then give it to them. After you've done this a few rounds, that's the to explain how to return spins serves, and then take your time with each player, showing them where to aim - down and to the side against sidespin, and up against backspin.Give a final short statement, reminding them about local table tennis, and thank them for coming.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2373title: April 4, 2016 - Remember the Feel of the Good Shotsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:This one is short and sweet. From now on, whenever you hit a really good shot,REMEMBERthe feel of that shot - the positioning, stroke, and contact. Then repeat. When you make a poor shot, put the feel of that one out of your mind like it never happened and remember the feel of the good ones. Theonlytime to think about a poor shot is if you absolutely cannot figure out how to make it a good one, and so have to analyze it. That is all.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2368title: March 28, 2016 - Stroke Technique vs. Consistency, Serve, and Receivedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players constantly obsess over their strokes, rightfully wanting to have "perfect technique." While that's admirable, it often keeps them from reaching their full potential. Why? Because the obsession with perfect technique often comes at the expense of developing consistency, serves, and receive. (Plus, what is "perfect technique"? Not all of the best players have the same technique.)Especially for players who have played a long time, trying to change technique is difficult and time-consuming. Instead, assuming the players had pretty good technique, the time might instead be used for developing consistency with those techniques, developing great serves, and mastering receive. If players obsessed over these as much as having "perfect technique," many would reach higher levels.This doesn't mean one shouldn't try to develop great technique - but it's all about the law of diminishing returns. Kids, and beginners without bad habits already ingrained, should focus on great technique. Others might settle for good (or perhaps very good) technique - and then, by using that technique for years, develop consistency without going for that elusive "perfect technique." Meanwhile, few players really develop their serves to a high level, and even fewer become good at receive, which is often called "everyone's weakness."So if you have good technique, discuss with a coach the relative advantages of going for perfect technique in limited practice time, versus working toward consistency, serve, and receive. Because guess what? Most matches below the highest levels are won on those three.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2364title: March 21, 2016 - Visualize Your Serves and Make Them Do Tricksdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Before you serve you should always visualize what the ball is going to do. It amazes me how many players just serve without really doing this. Top players have practiced their serves so much that this is instinctive - they don't think about it, they just know exactly what the ball is going to do. Visualizing a serve means seeing in your head before you serve the contact, direction, speed, spin, height, depth, bounces, and curve of the ball.One fun way of practicing this is to make your serves do tricks. For example, try serving backspin where you graze the ball so finely that all your energy goes into backspin - and so the serve bounces backward into the net. But it's not enough for the ball to come backwards - you should be able to visualize its actual path in advance. Try serving where you visualize how deep the ball will go and how many bounces before it comes backwards, and the direction it'll come back (since most backspin serves have some sidespin as well). This visualizing includes what the ball does on your side of the net - how fast the ball will travel, where the first bounce on your side will be, and how low to the net it'll be. (When first practicing heavy backspin serves or trying to make the ball bounce backwards, don't worry about serving too low. But as you master the serve, you want the ball to practically skim the net.)Serving backspin so that the ball bounces back into the net isn't really a serve you need in a match. In fact, it's better to drive such a backspin serve out more so that the second bounce is near the end-line, making it difficult for the receiver to attack, push short, or rush you with a quick, deep push. But the key is being able to control the serve - and you can't control it unless you know what you want the ball to do. Try to visualize the entire path of the ball in advance, including both bounces on the far side, and the way the ball curves between bounces if there's sidespin.Do the same with a regular sidespin serve, where you serve to one side of the table, but curve it back to the other side - but visualize the curving path of the ball in advance. Perhaps set up a target and try to curve the ball into the target.Then do the same thing with your deep serves, perhaps putting up targets on the far end-line, and try to hit them - again, visualizing the entire path of the ball in advance, right up until it smacks the target. Then do the same with all your other serves, with or without targets.At first, this visualizing will feel like a hassle that slows you down. But soon it'll become second nature, and you won't even think about it - but you'll have master control over your serves.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2360title: March 14, 2016 - Outlining the Book on Your Gamedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:In a Tip of the Week calledThe Book on Your Game, I wrote, "If you can't write a book on your game, either you don't know your game or you don't have a game." It's as simple as that.You don't need to actually write that book, but you should outline it. This will force you think about the various aspects of your game - your strengths, weaknesses, and everything in between, as well as where you want to go with your game. It'll get you to actually thinking about the things you should be thinking about if you want to improve. So let's put together an outline of such an outline. Note that we're not interested in inventorying and analyzing every stroke; what's important are what techniques you actually use. Your assignment, should you choose to accept, is to complete this outline for your game.GeneralWhat is your style of play in one sentence? (It can be a long one.)Example - the author's: All-out forehand attacker, both looping and smashing (but first loop sometimes too soft), with strong serve & attack, good receive, a steady but too passive backhand, and steady, all-around defense - blocking, fishing, lobbing, and sometimes even chopping.StrengthsWhat's the strongest part of your game?How do you get it into play?How are you turning this strength into something can dominate even against stronger players?WeaknessesWhat's the weakest part of your game?How do cover for it?What are you doing to improve this weakness?2. StrokesForehand attackAgainst pushAgainst blockAgainst loop (counterloop or smash)Forehand defense or counter-attackBackhand attackAgainst pushAgainst blockAgainst loop (counterloop or smash)Backhand defense or counter-attackPushingLongShort3. FootworkClose to tableOff tableIn and out during rallyCovering middleShort to forehand and backRecoveryGeneral positioningReady position4. ServeServes that set up your attackTrick serves (important but not to be overused)Variety of motionsVariety of spinsFast, deep servesVariety of depths and depth controlLow to net5. ReceiveForehand against long servesBackhand against long servesForehand against short servesShort pushLong pushFlipVariationBackhand against short servesShort pushLong pushFlipVariation6. PhysicalGeneral fitnessFoot speedStrengthEndurance7. MentalClear-minded and focusedAt start of matchWhen behindWhen aheadAt end of close gamesKnow how to recover from loss of focusKnow when to call time-outs to recover focus8. TacticalUnderstand what serves set up your gameUnderstand what receives set up your gameUnderstand what type of rallies you want to get intoKnow how to get your strengths into playKnow how to cover for your weaknessesGood at scouting opponents in advanceGood at analyzing opponents during a matchConsistently able to find two or three simple tactics that allow you to winUnderstand what you need to develop in your game to increase your tactical arsenal===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2354title: March 7, 2016 - Preparing for Major Events – a Checklistdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Players often come unprepared at tournaments and leagues. Here's a quick checklist of things to prepare in advance of the event. (Some of this was covered in previous Tips, but this gives you an actual checklist, with a few new items.)Lighting and Backgrounds. You are likely used to the lighting and backgrounds at your table tennis club, but when you go to a tournament or league at a different venue, you have to adjust to the new conditions. Show up early so you can warm up at the new venue to get used to the lighting and backgrounds – and note that "backgrounds" is pluralized as you should try to move around a bit and get used to different backgrounds. Often this means just switching sides on the table you are practicing on, since often one side looks onto the wall at the side of the gym, the other into the vast expanse of the gym – two very different backgrounds to adjust to.Floors. If you play with good, grippy floors, then you'll likely have problems if you have to compete on slippery ones. Surprisingly, it works the other way too – if you are used to slipper floors in practice, playing on grippy ones might give you trouble as you are used to sliding your feet across the floor as you move. So come early to adjust to the floors. If you are used to grippy floors, then bring grippy shoes to help adjust to slippery ones.Tables and Balls. Different types do play different, so do try to practice in advance on the tables and balls you will be using. You might want to order a few of each major type of ball so you'll always be prepared for this. If your club doesn't have the same type of table as the event you are going to, then come in early at the event to practice on theirs.Towel. If it's summer and you are used to playing in air conditioning, and you get caught playing in a non-air conditioned venue, you will want a towel, to wipe away sweat both on you, your racket, and the ball.Food and Drinks. Don't risk having to eat the local food and drinks unless you know in advance what will be there. You can usually assume there'll be plain water, but other than that you might want to either bring your own food and drinks, or investigate in advance what will be locally available.Warm-up Partner. You should arrange someone in advance. Let's face it, some players are easy to warm up with, others are not. Tournaments and leagues are not the time to experiment with how you warm up; arrange this in advance with someone you are familiar and comfortable warming up with.Serve and Receive. Why do so many players forget to practice their serves before a major event? They practice everything else, but forget this. You might also want to find a partner and practice receive.Sports Psychology. If you come in nervous, you are handicapping yourself. So make sure to come in with a positive attitude, ready to confidently take on the world!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2348title: February 29, 2016 - Move Those Feetdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Whether you are 8 or 80, or somewhere in between, moving your feet is a priority. It's something that coaches constantly harp on. Beginning kids often don't find it important, and so you have to drill it into them, and then they quickly pick up on it. Older players often find it difficult because of their age, but while age slows you down, it doesn't stop you from moving your feet – it's simply a habit. An older player who doesn't move fast but still moves his feet is faster than a really fast player who doesn't.Here is Exhibit A,video of George Brathwaite(12:05) in a training session. George "The Chief" is well into his eighties (here's hisHall of Fame profile), but see how he still moves his feet? That's because he has made it a habit. Let me emphasize this again: Moving the feet is ahabit. It has nothing to do with how fast your feet are or how old you are.Often players instead reach for the ball, meaning they limit their range, go off balance, and have to do an awkward stroke instead of the one they've spent so much time perfecting. The problem is they haven't developed the reaction ofsteppingto the ball, and so they instead react by instead reaching – which both puts them off balance and forces them to improvise the shot. Just as a person reflexively blinks if something comes at their eye, you should learn to reflexively step to wherever the ball is going. This doesn't mean you'll reach the ball every time, and sometimes you might even take that step and still have to lunge after it, but that'sonlyafter taking that first reflexive step. Focus on balance, with your weight centered as you move, and only going to your back foot for weight transfer as you get into position.Some would say, "Of course George can move his feet – he's a Hall of Fame player!" But that's backwards – he's a Hall of Famerbecausehe worked hard to develop such basic habits as moving his feet. George can do it in his eighties. What's your excuse?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2340title: February 22, 2016 - Three Tips to Increase Forehand Looping Powerdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you are the type of player who has trouble generating power when looping, try out these two tips, and you'll be surprised at the improvement.First, keep your legs farther apart, i.e. a wider stance. This makes it easier to transfer weight into the shot, meaning more power. Watch videos of the top players and you'll see how they all keep a pretty wide stance.Second, contact the ball more from your side. Many players contact the ball too much in front of their bodies, and so they get power mostly from their arms. By contacting more to the side, you get more natural body rotation into the shot, meaning more power.Third, tilt your wrist slightly back. This will naturally give you more wrist in the shot – and you'll likely use more forearm as well as you use it naturally to snap the wrist into the shot.By following these three tips, you'll get more power without really trying since none of these involve trying to "muscle" the ball – it's all about good habits that allow you to maximize your natural power.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2335title: February 15, 2016 - Improving Side-to-Side Reactiondate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players develop pretty good strokes, timing, and footwork, and in practice drills, where they know where the ball is going (i.e. rote drills), can execute them pretty well. But once they get into a more random drill or game, where they don't know where the ball is going (i.e. forehand or backhand), they fall apart. How can you fix this problem?The key thing here is reaction. Once you have good strokes, you can do various random drills such as having your partner or coach randomly block to all parts of the table while you loop or drive them back to the same spot, or serve backspin that your partner or coach pushes back anywhere and you have to loop. (Focus on a good neutral position, react rather than trying to anticipate, andstepto the ball.) These are excellent drills. But many players struggle with them, and don't get enough practice time on these types of drills to progress as fast as they'd like.There's a simple alternative. Find someone who can help you out – it doesn't have to be a table tennis player, it can be a friend, spouse, son/daughter,anyone– and simply have them randomly point left or right. You react by shadow-stroking either a forehand or backhand, depending on which way they point. Or, if you want to get fancy (and more closely mimic a game situation), have them toss balls at you randomly, forehand or backhand, and you react, either by shadow-stroking, or actually hitting them with your racket. (It's basically multiball, except since they are tossing the ball at you instead of hitting off a racket, anyone can do it.) In both cases, it's not exactly the same since you aren't reacting to a ball coming off a paddle, but it's reasonably close.Then watch as your apparent reaction time in game-type play improves! It's all about zeroing in on a weakness, and practicing the specific thing that you are having trouble with. The principle applies here and in all other aspects of table tennis . . . and life.And a call for help – can anyone design a simple phone app or other inexpensive device that randomly points left or right so a player can do this solo?EDIT: And from the comment below, here's the solution -Table Tennis Edge!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2328title: February 8, 2016 - Looping Against Backspin Drillsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:It's easy practicing topspin rallies since you can do them over and over in the same rally. The same is not true for practicing against backspin, unless you happen to have a chopper to practice with – and that's not quite the same either, since a chop against topspin comes out differently than a push, and you don't get practice switching from playing against backspin to playing against topspin or block. So how should you get your practice against backspin? There's a three-step process.1. Multiball. Here's where you learn and hone the forehand and backhand loops. You can do this with a coach or a practice partner where you take turns.2. Serve and Loop Drills. You serve backspin (usually short), and partner pushes it back long so you can practice looping. In each case you should play out the point. There are four main variations of this given below, in progressing difficulty. In all four of these variations you should probably do your first loop to the same spot each time so you can start off each drill with your partner making a good block. You might also arrange so your partner's first block goes to the same spot, depending on your level. For example, your first loop might go to your partner's backhand, he blocks to your forehand, and then you play out the point. There are many variations of these drills; decide what you need to work on and design the drill around that.Partner pushes to one spot, such as wide forehand or wide backhand, and you forehand or backhand loop, then play out the point.Partner pushes to wide forehand or middle and you forehand loop, or partner pushes to wide backhand or middle backhand and you backhand loop. While you know in advance whether you'll be doing a forehand or backhand loop, you now have to move to do so. Note that you should generally cover more of the table with the forehand (where the body is not in the way so you have more range, plus it's usually more powerful), which is why the backhand drill covers less of the table. But if you prefer backhand looping from the middle, make that adjustment. If you are a forehand player who covers a lot of ground with the forehand, then have them push to 2/3 of the table, or even the whole table, and you follow with a forehand.Partner pushes to either wide forehand or wide backhand and you have to react with either a forehand or backhand loop. Partner should practice deceptive pushing starting here – sometimes aiming one way, then going the other direction, and try pushing quick off the bounce.Partner pushes anywhere randomly and you have to react with either a forehand or backhand loop. Again, partner should sometimes aim one way and then go the other way, quick off the bounce.3. Improvised Games. Do the very same drills you did in the Serve and Loop Drills, except now you should play games that start out in these ways. Keeping score makes sure both players fight hard, and very closely resemble real game situations. Choose what's needed for you. At the advance levels mostly use the variation where your partner pushes the serve back anywhere and you loop, and then play out the point.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2321title: February 1, 2016 - Holding Back Against a Weaker Playerdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:A common problem when facing a weaker player is literally go into the match with the tactical plan of not playing your best. Rather than play your normal attacking shots, you play soft, hoping not to risk the more difficult shots that make you the better player. It's often a mistake.This doesn't mean you should be ripping shots left and right against a player where you could win without taking such risks. But if you are used to mostly attacking at a certain range of speeds off a given shot, and hold back on this to play "safe," you're more likely to both miss the shot while giving the opponent an easier shot to respond to. Holding back usually means you take conscious control of a shot to soften the shot for "safety," which means you are throwing away much of the muscle memory you've trained so hard to develop. Result? You play soft and erratic, and the opponent has shots to tee off against while not facing your best shots, the very ones that made you the better player.Thatis risky play.So it's usually best to just play your game against a weaker player, focusing on the type of tactics that will allow you to play your best game without playing overly safe or risky. By doing so from the start, you spread the "risk" over the entire match, and guess what? While individually some of these aggressive shots might be "risky," the risk goes away if spread out over an entire match. If you would normally loop a given ball rather hard, then do so, and let the muscle memory guide you.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2317title: January 25, 2016 - Should You Develop Your Forehand Push?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:At the lower levels, pushing is often over-used, but at the higher levels, many underestimate their value. All top players have excellent pushes. However, advanced players - and even intermediate players - rarely push against deep backspin to the forehand, unless they are choppers. (And even choppers will often attack them.) It's simply better for them to attack, usually with a loop. (The same can be said on the backhand, if you have a good backhand loop.) So … should you develop your forehand push?The answer is yes - but not necessarily against long backspin to the forehand. You need to develop your forehand push mostly against short backspin to the forehand. Against this ball, you can attack, but pushing is often the better bet. You can push short, push quick and long, go for angles, heavy spin, etc. - all sorts of variations. And because you are closer to your opponent, he has less time to react. (At the same time, don't predictably push - learn to flip short balls as well.)The problem is how do you practice your forehand push? If you push forehand to forehand with a partner, then unless both of you are practicing short pushes, you'll be practicing pushing against long balls. The answer is to develop the forehand push this way with a partner, but once it becomes relatively advanced, start focusing on drills where you start the drill by pushing against a short backspin, and then continue the drill/rally with other shots. You won't get as much repetitive practice this way, but you'll practice what you need to develop. For example, your partner serves short to your forehand; you push quick off the bounce to your partner's backhand; he pushes quick to your backhand; and you loop, either forehand or backhand. (Or, alternately, your partner loops off your forehand push, if it's "his" drill - and you still get practice pushing!)Meanwhile, a nice drill is to push forehand to forehand (or backhand to backhand) where both players push short - but the first time a player pushes long (by mistake), you loop. This develops your short push, develops your loop, and best of all, it develops your judgment on whether a ball is long or short.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2310title: January 18, 2016 - On Short Serves to the Forehand, Fake to the Forehand, Then Go Down the Linedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Some players have difficulty with serves that go short to their forehand – it's awkward for them to reach over the table for those serves. However, there's a tradeoff – you get an angle into the server's wide forehand. This means that 1) you have more table (its 10.3 feet corner to corner crosscourt, vs. 9 feet down the line), 2) your opponent has more ground to cover on that wide forehand, and 3) you can move your opponent out of position by going to his wide forehand.However, there's another option – fake crosscourt, but put the ball down the line. Often you don't even need to do this aggressively – just push or gently flip it down the line. What happens is that your opponent, knowing he has the wide forehand angle to cover, and also knowing that most players don't take the ball down the line as often, moves to cover that wide forehand angle. This leaves him open down the line – which is what you do. Surprisingly, if you flip, it's sometimes better to do this shot softly, so your opponent can't use your own speed to rebound your ball back, making up for his being out of position and unable to make a strong shot on his own. A soft down-the-line flip will often completely disarm the server. (If you push, a somewhat fast and quick off the bounce one is highly effective.)But key to this is to fake going crosscourt. It's only at the last second that you should tip your racket tip back from the forearm or wrist, aiming it to the right (for a righty), and take it down the line. Your opponent will be out of position, possibly over-anticipating a shot to his forehand, and will likely have to move back to his backhand, where he'll play a backhand shot instead of his likely stronger forehand.For lefties vs. righties, there's a similar dynamic – fake down the line, then go crosscourt into the backhand. It's just as effective. In both cases, you've completely taken his serve advantage away, and forced your opponent to play a moving backhand. What more can you ask?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2303title: January 11, 2016 - What Is a Good Serve?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Ask ten people, and you might get ten answers. But there is a simple definition: a Good Serve is one that helps you win. Ideally, this would mean a serve that the other guy can't return – but if you can do that, your opponent isn't your level anyway. What you really want is a serve that sets up Your Game.This means that if your best shot is a loop, then your serve should set up your loop as often as possible. If your best shot is a smash, then that's what your serve should set up. If you are more of a counterdriver, then that's what you want the serve to set up. And so on. On the other hand, what's a good serve for one player might not be a good serve for another. A short backspin serve might set up a looper who wants a push return – but it might not set up a counterdriver, who wants to get into a topspin-countering rally. A fast & deep serve might set up a hitter or counterdriver, but it might take a looper's best shot away. This doesn't mean a player should always serve the same way – but that they should favor the serves that will set them up.You also have to take the future into account. If you are a blocker, you might winnowby serving long over and over and letting your opponent attack so you can block. And while that might not be a bad tactic, strategically you might want to learn to serve and attack, perhaps by serving short, so you can add another aspect to your game. So you might want to develop serves that set you up to play the way you want to win in thefuture.So develop lots of Good Serves, which set up your game now, in the future . . . or perhaps ones that just win you points directly from the sheer Goodness of the Serve.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2297title: January 4, 2016 - Backhand Serve Deception with the Elbowdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The key to deception on the backhand serve is the elbow. If you are serving backspin, you should vigorously contact the ball on the downswing, as much under the ball as possible, with a motion similar to chopping wood with a backhand motion. But the swing doesn't end there – you should follow through sideways and up by vigorously pulling up with your elbow. This forces the opponent to have to figure out if you contacted the ball on the down swing, or on the sideways or upward swing.Similarly, when serving sidespin or side-topspin, you should start with this vigorous downward swing (chopping wood), as if serving backspin, but miss the ball, and instead contact it on the sideways or upward swing with that vigorous upward pull with your elbow. This time the elbow pull gives you spin instead of just being a fake motion. Again, the opponent has to figure out where you actually contacted the ball.This principle actually applies to most serves, where your racket goes through some sort of semi-circular motion (often very short and abrupt, so opponent can't pick up the contact), where often are more vigorous on the part of the swing where you don't contact the ball. It's just a bit more obvious with the backhand, where much of the deception comes from the elbow. (But you still need a vigorous wrist motion for spin.) One advantage of serving backhand – you are facing your opponent, and so can see what he's doing as you serve. Some players can even change their serve, or at least service direction, in response to the receiver changing position at the last second.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2293title: December 28, 2015 - You're Your Yoredate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Every part of your game has a history. If you are a longtime player, you should be able to look at any serve or stroke in your game and remember its history – how it started, how it developed, and where it stands today. If you are a more recent player, it’s even easier as it’s all fresh in your mind since you’ve just started.The key thing to remember is that your history changes constantly; you are in control of it. Why not take an inventory of your game – all of it – and think about how it got to be where it is, and then, more importantly, think about where it should be. Then begin the history that’ll lead to it being where it should be. Develop your yore.Suppose your pushes are consistent, but not very heavy. Why aren’t they heavy? Because you have a history of not pushing heavy, and every time you don’t push heavy, you re-enforce the nonheaviness habit of your pushes. So work on pushing heavy, begin to do it, and eventually you’ll have a history of pushing heavy – and it’ll be where it should be. And then you’ll be able to look back at the history of your push, and note that moment in time when you began to create a history of pushing heavy, and so developed that as part of your game.Every aspect of your game has a history, and you have control over developing the history that leads to each aspect. Take control of this history and develop your game to where it should be. You’re your yore.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2291title: December 14, 2015 - Fast, Quick Motions Disguise a No-Spin Servedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players learn to put decent spin on their serves. However, when faced with disguising this spin, they have great difficulty. Why not develop a tricky no-spin serve, with a fast, quick serve contact? Change directions in the split second that the racket contacts the ball, where it is nearly motionless, or contact the ball near the handle of the blade (where the racket is moving slowest) so there will be little spin … but your opponent will be left making a snap decision on what's on the ball. Perhaps exaggerate one direction, often down, then snap the racket up at contact, leaving the receiver to figure where the contact was – and you have three options: on the down swing (backspin), as the racket is changing directions (no-spin), or on the sideways or upswing (light sidespin or topspin). A no-spin serve is just as effective as a spin serve if the opponent thinks there is spin on the serve!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2286title: December 7, 2015 - Use Simple No-Spin Serves in Doublesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:In singles, you can serve to all parts of the table. This means you can usually force your opponent to receive from his weaker side, whether it's forehand or backhand. Not so in doubles! Now your opponent can choose his stronger side to receive. If you serve long, he'll probably attack it, usually by looping. If you serve short sidespin or topspin, he'll probably attack it as well with a flip. If you serve backspin, he can drop it short, push heavy, or flip it to a corner. What is a server to do?Surprisingly, the answer is often a very shot, very low no-spin serve. At the world-class level, it's the most common serve in doubles, and often in singles. Why is this? A short no-spin serve is tricky to push - it's easy to pop up, and you can't put as much backspin on it, since you don't have a ball's spin to rebound off your racket - you have to create all your own spin. It's also not as easy to flip aggressively as a ball with spin since you can't use the spin of an incoming ball to help your flip. A topspin or sidespin ball rebounds out with topspin when struck properly. A backspin ball can be aggressively flipped, and the backspin continues, except now as topspin. (Often the receiver can put great topspin on this ball, especially with a backhand banana flip.) But a no-spin ball doesn't rebound out, and you can't use its non-existent spin. Plus, it's easy to keep a no-spin ball low. (A slightly high no-spin ball is easy to attack, so beware.) This doesn't mean you should serve all no-spin. But it can be the primary serve, with other serves used as variations, especially short, heavy backspin.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2281title: November 30, 2015 - Use Equipment that Matches the Way You Want to Playdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Should one search for the perfect equipment that matches his game, or adjust his game to match his equipment? This is never an easy question, but here is the main factor to consider. Once you are beyond the beginning stage it’s time to think long-term, and think about what your ultimate style of play will be. Once you decide that, look at some of the top players who play that style. What equipment are they using? If you want to play like them and hit shots like them, it’s helpful to have similar equipment. So once you are past the beginning stage, it’s time to adjust your equipment tothe way you want to play.The comparison isn’t exact; they play at a much higher level and train full-time (including physical training), so depending on your level, you might want something slower, though not too much so. For example, if their sponge is too fast, you might want a slower version.One other thing to take into consideration is that if your game is centered around looping – as nearly all players at the higher levels are – then you do want something extra bouncy, that allows you to loop nearly anything, in particular one of the tensored sponges.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2277title: November 23, 2015 - When Playing an Unfamiliar Player, Focus on Serve & Receivedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When you face a new and unknown opponent, you aren't sure yet how the rallies are going to go. But you can control how the rallies start. Learn to use serve & receive to start rallies the way you want them to go, and so rather than you adjusting to your opponent, he has to adjust to you. It doesn't matter if the opponent plays very orthodox or has an unusual or weird style, you should be able to at least start the type of rally that favors you. A few examples:If you are good at attacking backspin, then a short, heavy, and very low backspin serve often forces a backspin return that you can attack.A short and low no-spin serve, as a variation to spin serves (especially backspin serves), is hard to either attack or push heavy, often giving you an easy ball to attack.If you serve a lot of short backspin serves and your opponent keeps pushing them back heavy, throw in short side-top serves and you'll likely get pop-ups.If you are good in fast topspin rallies, then a topspin or sidespin-topspin serve often forces a topspin return that you can attack. Mix them up with big breaking side-top serves as well as short ones.Fast & deep serves, strategically placed, often get you into a fast exchange, and can back players slightly off the table, giving you time to set up your attack. Forehand loopers are often forced out of position by these serves. Focus especially on side-top serves that break away from the receiver, fast no-spin at the elbow, and sudden quick ones down the line.Slow but deep sidespin serves, against an opponent who doesn't loop, sets you up for all sorts of attacks.If your opponent keeps attacking your short serve with his backhand, serve from the middle or forehand side so you have an angle to serve into his forehand, and force him to receive forehand.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2271title: November 16, 2015 - Loose Grip Leads to Better Shotsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players grip the racket too tightly. Many think this gives them added stability. Actually, all it does is tighten the muscles up by matching opposing muscles against each other rather than have them work together. It means that instead of smoothly executing a shot like the pros do, some of your muscles are trying to do the shot right while others are pressing back, making your shot ragged and erratic.It also leads to injuries as muscles are forced to battle against each other while simultaneously executing table tennis shots. Players with tight grips leave the playing hall with exhausted muscles; players with loose grips leave with relaxed, loose muscles.Here's a test. Imagine someone sneaking up behind you and grabbing your racket from your hand. It should come right out. If it doesn't, you're holding it too tightly. Conversely, it shouldn't be so loose as to wobble about in your hand, but that's rarely a problem.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2269title: November 9, 2015 - Sidespin Serves that Break Away Tend to Be More Effectivedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:A backhand sidespin serve tends to be more effective to an opponent's forehand, while a forehand pendulum serve tends to be more effective to the backhand. This is both because players often have to lunge after the ball as it breaks away, and because the racket angle needed to return these sidespins is less natural when done this way. Because the balls are breaking away from the table, it effectively increases the width of the table, forcing receivers to cover more ground. This doesn't mean only serving these serves to the side that they would break away from, only generally serving it more to that side. Each opponent is different, so try out each combination and see what happens.Using this principle, you might want to develop the following four serves.Big breaking sidespin serve (from the backhand side) deep into the backhand that breaks away from the receiver, usually done with a forehand pendulum serve. This is very difficult for many receivers to handle as they often don't have as much range on the backhand as the forehand, and so end up reaching for the ball as it breaks away.Big breaking sidespin serve (from the forehand side) deep into the forehand that breaks away from the receiver, usually done with a forehand tomahawk serve. This serve is extremely effective through the intermediate level, but doesn't work very well at the higher levels, where they just loop it. But it's often a free point against many club-level players, who lunge for the ball as it breaks away and so lose control, usually lifting it off the end or side.Short sidespin serve (from the middle or forehand side) to the wide forehand that breaks away from the receiver, either bouncing twice on the table (given the chance) or going off to the side, usually inside the corner. It is usually done with a tomahawk, backhand, or reverse pendulum serve. Many players find this serve very awkward to receive as they have to reach over the table with their forehand, and then often end up lunging at the ball when it breaks away. Below the advanced level players almost always return this crosscourt, so you can almost camp out on that side and wait for the return.Short sidespin serve (from the backhand side) to the wide backhand that breaks away from the receiver, either bouncing twice on the table (given the chance) or going off to the side, usually inside the corner. This is usually done with a forehand pendulum serve. This often isn't as effective as one that breaks short into the forehand, but many players will have trouble with it, plus it takes out the extreme angle into the forehand, which is important for players who strongly favor the forehand.So add these breaking sidespin serves to your repertoire, and give your opponents a case of the lungies!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2263title: November 2, 2015 - Distance from Table When Looping a Pushdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the common problems I see are players who stand too far from the table when looping against backspin. They'll stand well off the table, with their contact point in front of them. This means that to put their weight forward, they have to fall slightly backwards to compensate. It's either that or resorting to a rather soft loop, with mostly upward motion, and little speed.Instead, learn to almost jam the table with your left leg (for righties) when looping backspin. This allows you to rotate properly into the shot, even with the same contact point as the players who back up, since you'll be contacting the ball to the side of your body instead of in front. But now, with body torque, you'll have tremendous power, and so able to loop at all speeds.Having tremendous power does not mean you loop every ball with great speed. It means you effortlessly create power, and that power goes into both speed and spin. Go for about 50-50 on most shots, going for more speed against a weaker push or when you've really read it well. (Here's a Tip of the Week on creating "Easy Power.")Standing closer to the table also allows you loop backspin a bit quicker. Some players even take them on the rise, but for speed loops, it's best to take them at the top of the bounce; for more consistent loops with a higher spin to speed ratio, take them perhaps slightly on the drop.While this article was written about looping backspin, it all applies to looping against topspin as well, except the positioning is a bit more complex, depending more on the incoming ball. But against a softer topspin ball, you'd also want to stay close to the table and generally loop it around the top of the bounce, or even on the rise.Here are three examples from the final of the recent Men's World Cup. These players don't push long a lot, so in the first game there were only three long pushes where the other player forehand looped, twice by Ma Long, once by Fan Zhedong. Watch how close they are to the table in all three cases.Ma Long 1(7 sec in)Ma Long 2(93 sec in)Fan Zhedong(59 sec in)So remember - when you want to jam a loop down your opponent's throat, jam the table!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2255title: October 26, 2015 - Develop a Practice Partnerdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:It's the lament of developing players everywhere: How do I get a good practice partner? You might get lucky and find someone at your local club who happens to be about the same level, has the same burning desire to improve, and is both willing and available to train at the same times and number of hours that you want to do so. If so, you've hit the jackpot, and your game will be going places.But more often finding someone who meets all this criteria is difficult. So you may have to go to option two – develop a practice partner by practicing with a weaker player.This enhances your chances in multiple ways. First, the number of players below your level is almost for certain far greater than the number of players right around your level, and so the chances are greater of finding a compatible partner. Second, because it gives a weaker player the opportunity to train with someone stronger, the incentive is greater, so you are more likely to find a willing partner. And third, it will likely force you to focus on your basics, i.e. re-enforce the foundation of your game, which is so often overlooked.Let's elaborate on that last point. Many players look for practice partners at their level or higher, who can push them to a higher level. This often means playing faster and faster, which should make you better – and there's some truth to that. But what's often missing is the consistency part. If you ask a beginner and most intermediate players what the biggest difference between an average player and a top player, they would most likely say the pace they play at. If you ask a top player the same question, he'd likely say consistency. By hitting with a weaker player, you are forced to slow down a bit and focus on consistency – and that should be the foundation of your game.How do you develop such a practice partner out of a weaker player? At the start you have to be patient as the player won't be able to play at either your pace or consistency. So you use your powers as the stronger player and focus on consistency as well as accuracy – keep the ball right to their forehand and backhand pockets, so they can fine-tune their strokes and develop their consistency. And a magical thing will happen –not only will they improve, but they will get more and more used to your shots, and soon they will be practicing with you on an almost even basis. (I've not only done this in the past with several practice partners, I've seen others do it many times.)And note that they will be improving not because you are pushing them to play faster and faster, but because both of you are focused on consistency. Only increase the pace when both players are consistent at a given pace. (This is also a hint about practicing withanyplayer – focus on consistency. Stronger players play faster because they areconsistentat that speed.)So if you are having trouble finding a good practice partner, change your mind-set and develop one, and together you can take the table tennis world by storm.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2249title: October 19, 2015 - The Power of a Low, Short, No-Spin Servedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:At the beginning level, players serve without spin. However, these serves are usually pop-ups that any intermediate (or advanced beginner) can easily attack. As players move up the ranks they learn to serve with spin. But eventually players come full circle and begin serving no-spin again. Yes, this is a shocker to many players, but sometimes nearly half of world-class serves are no spin serves. Why is this?These no-spin serves aren't beginner-type no-spin serves. At the higher levels, there are two key differences: the serves are very low (whether no-spin or spin), and there's thethreatof spin. Since the receiver isn't sure at first whether the serve has spin or not, he can't just assume no-spin, nor can he get into a rhythm against the no-spin since he's getting a variety of serves with spin.But the key question is why no-spin serves are effective at the higher levels. It would seem that serving with spin is key, and that a no-spin serve wouldn't be much of a threat. But it doesn't work out that way. Here's why. (We're talking about short serves where, given the chance, the second bounce would be over the table. If the serve goes long, then spin or not, the receiver will likely loop it.)If you serve short backspin, then it is rather easy for a top player to drop it short – the backspin makes this easy as it deadens the ball for you. With the incoming backspin reversing on contact with your racket, it's also easier for the receiver to put backspin on the ball, wither pushing short or long. On the other hand, if you serve no-spin, while it's easier to read the degree of spin (since no-spin always has the same degree of no-spin!), it's not as easy to drop it short. Nor is it as easy to put extra backspin on the ball, since there's no backspin on the incoming ball to reverse – you have to create all the backspin yourself.If you serve short sidespin or topspin, it's easy to flip. The ball just jumps off the receiver's paddle, and comes out as a topspin, which makes it easy to control the flip. If you serve no-spin, the receiver doesn't have this jump, and has to create all the force of the shot himself, as well as any topspin to control the shot.So the overall result is that it's harder to drop short or put extra backspin on a push against a no-spin serve short than against a backspin serve, and it's harder to flip aggressively against a no-spin serve than against a sidespin or topspin serve. (A key thing here is serving low – a no-spin serve that's slightly high gets attacked much more easily than a spin serve that's slightly high.)There's still another advantage of a no-spin serve. While it's tricky trying to serve one spin while convincing the receiver it's another spin, it's probably easier to fake spin and serve no-spin. You simply contact the ball closer to the handle and put it over with a vigorous follow-through, faking spin. This is especially effective if you fake heavy backspin but serve no-spin – watch the opponent push this back and pop it up over and over! And then when you serve heavy backspin again, the opponent is often unsure of the spin, and so puts it right into the net.So the lesson here is to learn to serve short with spin, and then mix in no-spin serves. You would be surprised how many top players consider the no-spin serve their "go to" serve when it's close.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2243title: October 12, 2015 - Back Foot Position on Forehanddate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the technique changes in the sport over the past few decades has been the gradual evolution of the back foot placement on the forehand from the standard position, with the right foot back (for a righty), to the feet often being parallel. This is not advisable for beginners, not until they have made the proper forehand rotation a habit. But as you learn to play faster and faster, and closer to the table, there's less time to move the foot back. This means some loss of power, but an increase in quickness – and that payoff is enough for most world-class players.This only applies to shots taken near the table in a fast rally, where top players often take the ball at the top of the bounce or even on the rise. By keeping the feet parallel, they can execute these shots more quickly. (This is true for both hitting and looping, but these days loopers with tensor-like sponges dominate.) It's a riskier shot, taking good timing, but is often unreturnable, with the opponent often still recovering from the previous shot as yours whizzes past him.There's an additional benefit. By keeping the feet parallel, you are forced to rotate backwards more at the hips and waist, which mostly makes up for loss of power from not having a foot back to push off from.The question then is whether you should attempt this type of foot positioning on forehands. It depends on your level, quickness, fitness (in particular a supple waist), style of play, as well as your willingness to play riskier shots. Do you like living a little on the wild side, or playing it safe with the foot back?Once you have reached an intermediate level, and can play forehands effectively, you can look to develop this shot. But it does take a supple waist to make up for that lack of the foot being back. If you train regularly and practice this shot properly, you'll develop that supple waist as well as the timing needed for the shot. It'll always be a somewhat risky shot, but the reward is both an often unreturnable shot, and the realization that you've just pulled off a genuine world-class shot.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2237title: October 5, 2015 - Serving and the Snowball Effectdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the best ways to dramatically improve your game is to develop serves that lead to developing other aspects of your game. The stronger serves and developing other aspects of your game lead to a higher level of play, meaning you get to play stronger opponents, which leads to further improvement. The stronger opponents force you to continue to develop the serves and other aspects of your game, leading to a snowballing effect that can, over time, dramatically improve your level of play.I'm going to use my experience with this as an example. During my first few years I focused a lot on developing my serves. The result was I would get lots of relatively weak returns to attack. This developed both my attack and my footwork, which made me better both on my serve as well as in rallies. Because I became dominant on my serve and my attacks and footwork improved because of my serve, my overall level improved, and I began playing stronger players. Going up against better players pushed me to even higher levels. I was forced to improve my serve even more to keep them effective against stronger players. Since I had developed a strong serve and attack, as I played better players who received my serves better, I was forced to continue to improve my attack and footwork. The result? By developing my serves early on it snowballed my development. I was able to go from beginner to 1900 in about two and a half years, and 2100 in five. (With rating inflation, that's more like 2000 and 2200.)So what does this mean for you? Develop strong serves that allow you to consistently serve and attack. Such serves don't have to give you easy pop-ups; it's sufficient that they consistently give you balls you can attack, while forcing a number of "free" points as opponents make mistakes (often from trying to receive so you can't attack). Develop both third-ball serves (that allow you to consistently serve and attack) and a few "trick" serves (that give you free points if not overused - most such serves become ineffective after a few usages). Learn to serve with great spin and deception (including no-spin serves that look spinny), both short and long, to all parts of the table, with different serving motions. If you aren't sure how to do these serves, talk to a coach or top player.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2231title: September 28, 2015 - Watch the Top Players Before a Tournament or Big Matchdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the best ways to play your best is to watch the top players. Their techniques and timing will rub off on you. Your subconscious, which really controls your play, will especially pick up on it. Choose a top player who has a similar game and strokes, and just imagine being that player as you watch. Focus on:their strokes;their consistency;how they move;how they serve to set up their shots;how they receive to stop the server from making a strong attack;how focused they are.Just remember not to over-play. What looks like a big shot from a top player is often just an average shot for them. Focus on their techniques, tactics, mental strength, and consistency.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2224title: September 21, 2015 - Recover from the Previous Shotdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Table tennis is a game of movement. You'll regularly see players fail to run down a shot, and then grumble to themselves, "Too slow!" But was he really too slow, or did he fail to recover from the previous shot?Everyone is limited by their natural foot speed. However, players who grumble about being "too slow" often have it wrong – they aren't too slow, they simply get a slow start because of a poor recovery from the previous shot.Here are some tips that'll allow you to recover and react more quickly to an opponent's shot, allowing you to move more quickly. Do these, and your slowness of feet will be gone with the wind – or, to paraphrase afamous quote, "As the Table Tennis Gods are your witness, you'll never be slow again!"Focus on balance. If you are even slightly off-balance from the previous shot you'll have a slow recovery as you recover that balance, and so will be slow to get to the next shot. This especially happens after players do exaggerated follow-throughs on forehand shots. Try to staybalanced throughout the stroke.Ready stance. If you don't smoothly and quickly move into a goodready stanceafter the previous shot, you won't be ready to react to the next shot. This means feet relatively wide, weight toward the inside balls of the feet, feet pointed slightly outward, knees slightly bent, racket held out in front and aimed at the opponent.Racket height. If you hold your racket too high after the previous shot or in your regular ready position, it'll take too long to bring it down for the next shot.Flex those knees. If you don't flex them at least slightly as the opponent is hitting his shot (i.e. a mini-bounce), you'll have to do soafterhe hits his shot before you can move, which slows you down. Learn to belight on your feet.Clear the mind and just react. If you try to anticipate an opponent's shot, then unless you get it exactly right every time you won't be physically or mentally ready for the next shot, which slows you down. It's better to just watch the opponent and react as soon as he's committed to a shot and direction. Learn towork with your subconscious.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2219title: September 14, 2015 - Do You Have the Blocking Reachies?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Raise your hand if you tend to reach for the ball when blocking. Don't be shy – raising your hand is like reaching for the ball, so you should be good at it!The problem with reaching for the ball is that it means you'll have multiple blocking strokes, rather than two good ones (backhand and forehand). This doesn't mean you can't ever reach when needed, but that should be a last resort. Stepping to the ball allows you to use the same consistent blocking stroke over and over, leading to a consistent block. So let's kick this habit once and for all so you'll never reach for the ball when blocking or find yourself raising your hand while reading a coaching article.What causes the Blocking Reachies? Several things.You have no choice but to reach if your feet are anchored to the ground. So be light on your feet. Weight should be toward the front inside part of the feet. Bounce slightly between shots to better prepare yourself for the next shot. Even slow, out-of-shape players with bad knees can do this; it's just a habit to develop.If you wait to see if you have to move, you're wasting time. Expect to move; it's just a matter of what direction and how far. So imagine you are on the starting blocks, and take off as soon as you see where the ball is going.Moving is a habit. Players who think they aren't fast enough to move are mistaking a bad habit for slowness. The instant you see where the ball is going your reaction should be to step in that direction. You can begin a step just as fast as you can begin a reach. If necessary, do both, just don't skip the stepping part. One way to make this a habit is to shadow stroke the footwork. Imagine a ball coming to you to your right or left, and practice stepping to it to block. Do this over and over until it's habit. Focus on balance as you move. And don't rush; in most cases you have more time than you think.Develop confidence in your blocking, knowing that you can cover the entire table with a single step in either direction, and turn yourself into theGreat Wall of You.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2211title: September 7, 2015 - Never Look for a Winnerdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players are always looking for shots to put away, especially when serving. The problem here is that if you consciously look for shots to put away, then you are consciously taking control of your shots instead of letting your training (i.e. your subconscious) do what it's been trained to do. Instead, just let the shots happen, i.e. let your trained reflexes take over.If there's a shot you can put away, your training should take over and you'll put the ball away. If it's not a shot you can put away, then your training will allow you to react appropriately – but if you were consciously looking for a ball to put away, then that won't happen as you've put aside your training to consciously take control. If your trainingdoesn'ttake control properly, then you need to train yourself so that itdoeshappen.How do you train yourself to reflexively go for winners when the shot is there? Practice. (Pause while you stop groaning.) And how do you do that? Here are two ways.With a coach: He can feed you multiball where he mixes in difficult and easy shots, and you put away the easy ones. After each shot is when you consciously think about whether you went for the right shot. You can do this against either backspin or topspin, or a mixture.With a practice partner or coach, or in practice matches: Practice your serve and attack, where you have to judge each time if your partner's return can be put away or not. Try to clear your mind and let your reactions take over. After each rally, that's when you should consciously think about whether you went for the right shot. If you think about it, your subconscious will get the message.When should you go for a put-away shot? That's different for everyone, but you'll learn what you can do with experience and practice. Obviously high balls should be put away, but you should also learn to put away most balls that land in the middle of the table (depth-wise), shots where you aren't rushed or pressured (by the ball's speed, spin, or placement), and perhaps even off a strong shot when you read and time the ball just right.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2205title: August 31, 2015 - How to Serve to the Backhand Attacking Receiverdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the most difficult and often frustrating players to play is the one who seems able to attack all of your serves at will, even short backspin serves. In your attempt to get the attack, you might serve short backspin serves, but he just reaches in and backhand flips them.You could just accept this, and play rallies with him, where each rally on your serve starts with you having to counter-attack off his backhand flip. But that means giving up your serve advantage – and since you still have to face your opponent's serves, is likely a losing tactic. However, there's a better way of looking at this. You can't stop him from attacking your serves, but you can make him miss a good percentage of them. How to do this? There are three main ways.First, you challenge him with extremely low and heavy backspin serves, with a few no-spin serves thrown in to mess him up. Many players think they are serving low, but their serves actually cross the net too high and bounce too high. (Here's a Tip of the Week onServing Low.)  Or they think they are serving heavy backspin but aren't getting enough spin. (Here's a Tip of the Week onHow to Create a Truly Heavy Backspin Serve.) Or they don't vary their backspin serves with no-spin serves. (Here's a Tip of the Week onThose Dizzying No-Spin Serves.)Second, you challenge him by varying the spin and placement, and mixing in long serves. Here are some Tips of the Week on these:Serving Short with Spin;Where to Serve Short; andTurn Opponents Into Puppets with Long Serves.Third, you can serve from the middle or forehand side of the table so you have an angle into the short forehand, and then vary between serving short to the forehand and long to the backhand, using the same motion. (It's most effective if you can serve short to the forehand with a backhand sidespin type serve.) Here's a Tip of the week onServing Short to Forehand and Long to Backhand.Ultimately, you cannot stop a receiver from trying to attack your serves, but you can maximize the number of mistakes he'll make in doing so. If he makes too many, either you win from that, or he'll have to reconsider his aggressive receives.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2198title: August 24, 2015 - Vary Your Receive - Exhibit A: Receiving a Short Backspin Serve to the Forehanddate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players have only a few receives off any given serve. This means they may be comfortable against those serves, but they aren't really doing anything to "mess up the server." How do you mess up the server? There are three ways.You can attack the serve. But that means going for relatively high-risk shots, and the advantage of the attack is often offset by the misses. Plus, if you attack every serve, you become predictable, and so the server is ready for it.You can neutralize the serve and get into a neutral rally. There are many ways of doing this, such as a short push, a well-executed deep push, or a well-placed medium attack. These are great options, but also become predictable.You can vary your receive so the server has no idea what you are going to do next.This last one is the hardest for most players to execute as it means having numerous ways of returning any given serve. In many cases you only need a few options. But there are many times where having more options will pay off - plus, if you have many options, you are more likely to have the specific options that the server will have trouble with.I'm going to go over an exercise I often demonstrate in clinics. I get a volunteer to serve short backspin to my forehand. I have him do this over and over, and each time I give a different receive. Here's a short list of some of the possibilities - and yet many players rely almost exclusively on one or two of these. You don't need to do all of these, but you should be able to do nearly all of them, and then pick and choose which ones are the most effective options against a given opponent - and then "cycle" through those options so the server never knows what's coming next. The following is just for receiving short backspin serves to the forehand; you should work out on your own the options on other serves. In general, you should look to have more options against short serves, and be aggressive against long serves. (We'll assume the volunteer is a righty.)Quick push to forehand.Quick push to middle (opponent's elbow - when you go there you want to be quick).Quick push down line to backhand.Aim to wide forehand then quick push to backhand.Aim to wide backhand then quick push to forehand.Extremely heavy push to wide forehand.Extremely heavy push to wide backhand.Aim to wide forehand then sidespin push to wide backhand (ball breaking to right).Aim to wide backhand then sidespin push to wide forehand (ball breaking to left).Aim to wide forehand then push short to backhand.Aim to wide backhand then push short to backhand.Aggressive topspin flip to wide forehand.Aggressive topspin flip to middle (opponent's elbow).Aggressive topspin flip down line to backhand.Aim to wide forehand then flip to wide backhand.Aim to wide forehand then flip to middle (opponent's elbow).Aim to wide backhand then flip to wide forehand.Aim to wide backhand then flip to middle (opponent's elbow).Flat but quick flip to wide forehand.Flat but quick flip to middle (opponent's elbow).Flat but quick flip to backhand.Fake a push but at the last second flip - this gives you about ten more possibilities.Step to right and flip with backhand - and suddenly you have lots of new possibilities as you can aim one way, go another, and go after the backhand, middle, or forehand.When pushing, vary the contact point to throw off opponent's timing, sometimes taking the ball quick off the bounce, sometimes at the top of the bounce, and other times taking it later, which surprisingly throws many opponent's off.No-spin pushes!Are you starting to see the possibilities? You don't need to learn all of these; pick the ones you like, and practice them until they are weapons in your arsenal, ready to pull out as needed to "mess up the server."===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2193title: August 17, 2015 - Controlling a Matchdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:A match doesn't always go to the player with the best shots. Just as often it goes to the player who knows how to control play. It doesn't matter how strong the opponent's shots may be if he rarely gets a chance to use them effectively. How do you do this?You control a match primarily with serve and receive, which sets up your first shot in the rally. When choosing these shots you should ask yourself three questions:What serve/receive is your opponent weakest against?This is the most obvious and needs little explaining. It's also the most overused, as opponents expect this, and develop ways to overcome these weaknesses. This doesn't mean you shouldn't pound your opponent on his weaknesses, but if that's the limit of your tactics, you'll have trouble controlling a match against many players.What serve/receive will put your opponent into a weak position?Sometimes this overlaps with #1 above, but not always. For example, a player may have a very good forehand flip against a short serve to the forehand, but it draws him over the table, and if he's weaker on the backhand, it might leave him open on that side. So you might sometimes serve short to the forehand, and prepare to block his flip to his backhand, and then take control of the rally. Or, against a strong forehand player, sometimes challenge his forehand by serving deep there, and quick block to the weaker backhand side, and take control of the rally. (The reverse of both of these also works, where you serve to the backhand and block to the forehand.)The same idea works when receiving. For example, a player may have a strong forehand loop against backspin, but if you aim your receive to the forehand, and then at the last second instead quick push to the backhand, it takes away the opponent's forehand loop and puts him in a weak position. In general, if an opponent is strong on one side but weaker on the other, you might want to go wide to the strong side first, then quick block to the weak side, catching the opponent out of position and forced to use his weaker side while moving or reaching.What serve/receive is your opponent not expecting?This is probably most underused tactic. If a player has trouble with a certain serve, receive, or shot, he'll likely be expecting it. While you should still pound him on this weakness, you'll do even better if you regularly catch him off guard with the unexpected. Examples are endless - you simply vary all of your serves, receives, and shots to keep the opponent off guard, forcing erratic or weaker returns, and then take control of the rally. But there are a number of standard combinations that can keep an opponent guessing. For example, using the same serving motion, serve either short to the forehand with varying spins (including no-spin), and deep, breaking serves to the backhand. The opponent doesn't know if he's got to be ready to step in for the short serve to the forehand or cover the wide, deep backhand. Then throw in a few other serves, such as a fast no-spin to the middle, and watch the opponent wither.This tactic is also way underused when receiving. Far too many players receive predictably over and over rather than catch the opponent off guard. This is often because a player doesn't have confidence in more than one type of receive against a given serve - but rather than resigning himself to mediocrity, why not develop a full range of receives, so that you can both receive in the way the opponent has the most trouble against (#1 above), as well as being able to vary the receive and so leaving your opponent never knowing what to expect?Always remember - whoever has the bigger serve & receive arsenal - and knows how to use it to control play - usually wins.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2188title: August 10, 2015 - You Can Be Light on Your Feetdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:There's a myth that to be light on your feet, you have to be in great shape. It's true that being in great shape will allow you to move faster than one who is not. But this is not the same thing as being light on your feet, which is about howquicklyyou start to move, not how fast you move once you get going.How quickly you start to move - i.e. how light you are on your feet - is mostly a technique thing. If you watch the top players or anyone who seems to move quickly, watch how they take a slight hop as the opponent is making his shot. It is this slight bounce that prepares a player to move almost instantly. Those who simply stand there, waiting to see if and where they have to move, lose the bounce that comes from this, and so they are very slow to start to move.There are players a hundred pounds overweight or in their seventies who are light on their feet, and players in tiptop physical condition who are not. This doesn't mean they move fast; it means they get started quickly, and so while they may not cover a lot of ground, they often seem to always be in position - because they are never flat-footed and stuck in place. It means they react to shots very quickly because they are always ready to move.Are you light on your feet? There's a simple test. When you are caught off guard, such as against a net or edge ball, do you step to the ball, or do you just reach for it? If the latter, you are flat-footed.To see this little bounce that players do between shots, you can watch just about any video of top players, and focus on one player. You'll see this slight bounce as the opponent is hitting the ball. Few people see this because 1) it happens too fast, and 2) when watching a match, most viewers are watching whoever is hitting the ball rather than the one who is not. Ideally, see it in slow motion.Here's videoof Zhang Jike doing multiball. Watchseconds 45-50, and you can see (in the slow motion) the very obvious bounce he does between shots.Or just watch video of just about any other high-level match, such as thevideo highlights(4:50) of the Men's Singles Final at the 2015 World Championships. Focus on either player (Ma Long in Black, Fang Bo in orange), and watch their knees. For example, in the very first point, see how Ma Long returns the serve, and then makes two great forehand loops. But it is the slight hop he takes before moving to each of these shots that allows him to get the quick start that positions him for these shots.Another thing that's important is the foot positioning. To be light on your feet, use a relatively wide stance in a slight crouch, knees pointed slightly outward, with weight on the inside balls of the feet.The thing to emphasize is that you can be overweight, old, and have bad knees, and you can still take this slight bounce - it's just a matter of making it a habit. How do you make it a habit? Like anything else - practice. But the nice thing is that this is one of those few things you can practice doing just as well in a match as in a drill, so there's no excuse for not practicing it. Just do it.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2182title: August 3, 2015 - Get to the Root of the Problemdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many coaches and players try to fix problems by fixing the symptoms. In many ways, this is what separates a good, experienced coach from, say, a top player who knows proper technique but isn't that experienced in coaching it.Here's an example. Suppose a player tends to fall back as they loop forehands. The "simple" solution, of course, is to tell them to focus on rotating around and forward into the ball, i.e. "don't fall back." And many coaches try this many times, and it doesn't work – because they are treating asymptomof a problem rather than therootof the problem. The real question iswhyis the player falling backwards – and the answer almost every time is that he's too far from the ball, with his left leg too far from the table. And so he's forced to reach a bit forward. The falling back is to keep his balance. Solution: Have the player stand closer to the ball, with the left leg closer to the table. Then he'll have a natural rotation into and through the ball, with no falling backwards and off balance afterwards.Here's another. Some players struggle to rotate their body backwards (to the right for righties) on the forehand. The more they try, the more awkward they look. I've seen coaches struggle with this, not being able to figure out why the player has so much trouble with something that's so easy for others. And so they'll keep telling the player to rotate more on the forehand. But the player simply can't do the rotation comfortably – thesymptomof a problem – because they haven't fixed therootof the problem – which usually is their knees are facing forward. If you watch top players, the knees point somewhat outward in their ready stance, which allows easy rotation in either direction.Here's an example– see how the knees point somewhat sideways, not forward?And here's another. Often players struggle to get great spin on their serves. Rather than converting most of their energy into spin, and getting slow but super-spinny serves, their serves go long, with only moderate spin. Often they are told to graze the ball more, but when they try, they are unable to do so – because the inability to graze the ball is asymptomof a problem, not therootof the problem. The root of the problem usually is they are contacting the back of the ball, often toward the top. If they want to graze the ball more, they need to contact more under the ball and more on the side. If the player doesn't change his contact point, he'll continue to struggle to graze the ball as his racket will be approaching the ball too directly to graze the ball, resulting in a flatter contact. You can still get moderate spin this way, and many players (and coaches) settle for that, never realizing how they are limiting themselves.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2178title: July 20, 2015 - The Tricky Side of Table Tennisdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Here are ten tricky things you can do to win a few points here and there – as well as make the game more interesting!Muscle-Tensing Ball Clench. When hiding the ball under the table at the start of a match to see who serves first, subtly clench the muscles in the hand not holding the ball, and you're opponent will likely choose that hand, giving you the choice of serve, receiver, or side.The Left-Right Shuffle. This is for when you are playing someone who will almost for certain push your serve back, and who will push to your wide forehand if you leave it open. (We'll assume both players are righties for this.) You serve backspin to their backhand, and then, before the opponent hits the ball, you step to your left as if you are looking for a forehand from the backhand corner. Then, just as the receiver is predictably pushing to your open forehand, you step that way and have an easy forehand loop.The Server Stare. As you are serving look intently at one spot, but serve to another spot.Ready Position Switch. As the opponent serves, change your ready position. You can vary from a neutral position, a backhand position, or a forehand position.Funky Serves. There's nothing like a weird serve to throw an opponent off. For example, did you know it's legal to serve off the back of your hand? The racket is considered to include your playing hand below the wrist. Or any weird or "funky" move as you serve. Some Japanese players are infamous for rather weird arm contortions as they serve. Or just develop some sort of rare serve that might not be so effective on its own, but because they don't see it often, if you use it sparingly it becomes effective.Varying Bounce Serve. Before serving, bounce the ball on the table a number of times, as many top players do. Most of the time do the same number of bounces – say, five – and then quickly serve. Then, at a key moment, only bounce it once, and then quickly serve. It may throw off your opponent's timing.Fake Loop. When an opponent pushes, wind up as if you are going for a big loop, but at the last second push. Your opponent will likely be getting set to block, and so will be caught off guard by this.Dummy Loop. Loop the ball, but keep your wrist up so there's little snap into the shot. Exaggerate your follow-through. The ball will look spinny but will be relatively dead, and your opponent will likely struggle to adjust or he'll go into the net.Dummy Push. Push, but use no wrist at contact, and just pat the ball back rather than spin it. Right after contact do a big wrist snap. The push will look spinny but will be nearly spinless, and the opponent will likely pop it up or go off the end.Last-Second Changes. With any shot, aim one way, and change directions at the last second. This is especially effective with short, quick shots, such as pushes and blocks, but also works for other shots, including loops.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2173title: July 13, 2015 - Change, and the Definition of Insanitydate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Insanity is often defined as doing the same thing over and over again and expecting a different result. In some contexts, this might not seem to make sense. If you are learning something new in table tennis and can't get it right, you keep doing it over and over until you do get it right. However, the key point is this – if you are learning something new and keep missing, that means you are doing somethingwrong, and until you change that, you'll keep missing.Change is the key when learning. And yet, over and over, players do the same old things and expect different results. I'll watch players lose because they keep blocking an opponent's loop off the end, and then, instead of doing somesaturation trainingto fix their blocking, they'll go practice what they've always practiced – looping, hitting, whatever – and of course that's why they are strong on the things they practice a lot, and not strong on the things they don't practice as much. Or they'll be unable to return a certain serve, and yet, when it's over, rather than find someone who can do that serve so they can practice against it, they'll practice the same things they've always practiced. They won't even try to learn the serve that gave them trouble, when of course it might be a weapon they could use against others.So go take a good, hard look at your game. What problems do you see? What can you change to fix that? Perhaps ask a coach or knowledgeable player the same question. Then address the problem.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2164title: June 29, 2015 - The Feel of a Shot and a Checklistdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When learning new techniques, many players make the mistake of trying to remember the specifics of each shot. While this is important to know later as a checklist to go over when the shot is off, this is not the way to learn a new technique. Instead, your goal is to get the shot rightone time, and then remember the feel of that shot – the stroke and contact – and then repeat. If you get the feel right, all the specifics will fall into place.When your shots aren’t working and it doesn’t feel right, that’s when you might need to go through a short checklist for the new technique to find out what’s wrong. But again, the goal is to get the feel right, and then put the checklist aside.So learn both the feel and the specifics of each new technique you learn, and write the latter down – that’s an assignment – and then forget about them and focus on the feel. When the feel is right, so will the technique. When the feel is wrong, and you can’t figure out why, that’s when you pull out your checklist to get back to the right feel.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2157title: June 22, 2015 - Conquer the One-Winged Blues by Developing Your Weaker Sidedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players are much stronger on one side than the other. Often this is the forehand, but not always. They generally find tactical ways through serve, receive, and placement to cover for their weaker side while trying to dominate with their stronger side. This often works, to a point. However, it means accepting an inherent weakness in one’s game, which often becomes a barrier to improvement.Slightly stronger players – the ones you are trying to learn to compete with – will usually have the tools and tactical skills to play into this weakness. For example, if you have a strong forehand but weaker backhand, a smart opponent will simply serve fast and deep to the backhand, and hit fast, quick rally shots there, with the threat of a fast serve or shot to the forehand if you try to cover the backhand with the forehand. Or he might serve short to the forehand, drawing you in over the table, and then go deep to the backhand. Or he might just serve deep to the forehand and quick-block your return to the backhand. There are many ways of finding the weak side.Supposed you are stronger on one side. Much of this might be because of your grip, playing stance, or just your mental mode, where you focus on the strong side (for example, are stuck in “forehand mode”), and so get caught on the weak side. But these are relatively easy things to fix, if you know what you are doing. (If you don’t, get a coach or consult with a knowledgeable player.) Spend some time developing that “weaker” side so that when you are forced to use it, it’s pretty strong, even if not as good as your stronger side. It might be as simple as learning to mentally change from “forehand mode” to “two-winged mode,” or even “backhand mode.” Or it might mean small changes in your grip or stance.What you want to do is to dominate many points with your strong side when you can, but also force your opponent to sacrifice his own normal tactics, forcing him to instead use his tactics to find your “weaker” side. To do so he’ll have to adjust his tactics and game, which puts him at a disadvantage until he actually gets to the weaker side, which essentially means he’s willing to give up points in return for doing so. And then, when he finds it, you want him to find that weak side isn’t so weak, and that even after giving up points to get to it, he still has a difficult struggle to score.And so he’ll be stuck trying to decide whether it’s worth giving up points to find your “weak” side, which isn’t so weak, or give up on the tactics that avoided your “strong” side – and so you’ll be able to play your strong side more often. It gives him a no-win tactical choice. Isn’t that a wonderful thing?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2150title: June 15, 2015 - Good Receive is What Worksdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:What is a good receive? It’s whatever maximizes your chances of winning the point. End of story.But let’s elaborate. Many players fall into one of two bad habits when receiving: too passive or too aggressive. The ideal receiver can do both, depending on the situation. Plus, what might seem passive to some observers might, in the situation, actually be quite aggressive, such as a sudden quick and aggressive push or drop shot that catch the opponent off guard.Too passive. Usually this means players who push long against most backspin serves (even long ones), or make safe blocks or counters off topspin serves. Players like this develop great ball control, and if they have good defense (such as a good block), they can get away with this, to an extent. But these players are giving the server a predictable defensive return they can attack, and this becomes lower and lower percentage as you improve and play better players. And yet, even at higher levels, a good push can be an effective return, as long as it really is agoodpush – quick and rather fast, deep, heavy or varied spin, low, and well angled, with the direction disguised or changed at the last second. But a long push receive is a lot more effective if the server doesn’t know it’s coming, so it’s important for a good receiver to at least have the threat of something else – either an attack or (against a short serve) a short return.Too aggressive. Usually this means players who essentially attack every serve. While this is high percentage against deep serves (especially at higher levels), doing this over and over isn’t usually the highest percentage receive against short serves. This is where variation becomes important – so learn to push long, short, and flip.So what is the best receive? It’s a combination of both of the above, but where each receive is chosen wisely so as to maximize your chances of winning the point. One could spend hours going over the possibilities, but all a player really needs to do is focus on one opponent at a time, and with a little experimentation and observation, figure out which receives will maximize your chances of winning the point.If pushing over and over works, then that is the best receive; if attacking over and over works, then that is the best receive. Usually, but not always, the best is a mixture of the two, though that might take practice. Or you might get creative and use more advanced variations, such as sidespin pushes or blocks, changes of pace, and last-minute changes of directions.There are at least two cases where you might not want to receive so as to maximize your chances of winning the point.Mix things up. You might receive in a way just to mix things up or give the server something to think about. For example, on a short serve to the forehand, if you don’t have a good flip the better receive might be to push, but perhaps an aggressive flip will both make the server hesitant to serve there again, and make future pushes more effective as he guards against the flip.Practicing for the future. You may go for more advanced but lower-percentage (for now) receives so as to practice and develop the shot. For example, on that short serve to the forehand where pushing might be higher percentage you might want to flip so as to practice that flip, so that in the future, that might become a higher-percentage receive – and thereby making your receive that much better.So find the right balance between passive and aggressive receives, while adding in variations and practicing for the future to find the ideal receive. And if you get it wrong, there’s always the next serve.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2144title: June 8, 2015 - What to Think About in a Matchdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Have you ever been in a close match, began to think about winning and losing, and fell apart and lost? Or perhaps you were winning, began to think about it, and again fell apart and lost. It’s almost certain that you have been in both scenarios. So how do you avoid this?A key thing is tohave something else to think about. The mind can only think about one thing at a time. As an experiment, try thinking about what serve you might use in a match against a specific player you play regularly, and see if you can think about winning and losing at the same time. You can’t – in fact, the very thinking about what serve to do will likely wipe away most nervousness as nervousness comes from thinking (i.e. worrying) about winning and losing.So give your mind something else to focus on. And that should be basic tactics. In theory you could think about anything else, but then you might not be paying attention to what’s going on at the table, and you probably wouldn’t play so well or as smart. But if you focus on basic tactics you get a double whammy – you play smarter table tennis, and you stop worrying about winning or losing. The key is to keep it simple; don’t overthink. Focus on why you are winning – which serves, receives, and rally shots are winning points for you. Ask yourself:Which serves are working for you?This is the one time where you have complete control of the start of a rally, so take advantage of it. Focus on what to do with expected receives, but keep the mind clear and ready for anything.What receives are working for you?Focus on what to do with expected serves, but keep the mind clear and ready for anything.What types of rallies are working for you?Focus on the one or two most important things. It could be specific placements, a type of shot you want to use, or something as simple as “keep attacking.” But again, keep the mind clear and ready for anything.If you keep your mind on these basic tactics, then you’ll keep your mind occupied so you won’t think about winning or losing, which is a quick way to blow a match.Here are a few additional tips:If you are winning and start thinking about it, perhaps convince yourself that you are losing. Reverse the score in your mind if necessary. Then think about what basic tactics are winning points for you, and focus on those.If you are in the “zone,” and playing extremely well, the worst thing you can do is think about it. If you do, just smile inwardly, and think of yourself as an observer watching while your body and subconscious perform. (Butyou’llget the credit!)If you do lose your focus in a contested game, that’s when to take a time-out. Any time you lose focus you need to clear you mind, and then get it back on track, thinking about basic tactics andnothing else.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2138title: June 1, 2015 - Fast No-Spin Serves to the Middledate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Free Points – who wants ‘em?!!! Oh, you, the reader? Well then, here’s theeasiestway to get a free point in table tennis – a fast no-spin serve to the middle. (That’s usually the opponent’s elbow, the transition point between forehand and backhand, though it varies for some players.) Here is what often happens when you do this:Because it comes to the middle, the receiver has to make a snap decision on whether to use forehand or backhand.The receiver then has to move quickly against a fast incoming ball, often after a slow start as he decided between forehand and backhand.Because it comes fast, the receiver is rushed and has little time to make these decisions and movements.Because the receiver has little time to make these decisions and movements, he tends to shorten his stroke and lose some control.Because it has no spin, the ball tends to “dies” when it contacts the opponent’s racket.Because the receiver tends to shorten his stroke and lose some control, he isn’t able to generate the extra force needed to lift the no-spin ball, nor does he have the control to get the proper racket angle, and so the ball dies and goes into the net.Because the ball is coming fast, and most fast serves have topspin, the receiver tends to receive it like a topspin, and so goes into the net.Even when this serve is read properly, most players are forced to take the serve late and lift it, often setting the server up for an easy attack. But unless overused, many receivers will struggle with this over and over. If used two or three times a game, this is a free point about half the time against players rated under 2000, and it can be pretty effective against stronger players as well. It is especially effective against your normal two-winged player, who is ready to receive forehand or backhand. It is a bit less effective against a one-winged looper with fast footwork, who will usually loop the serve, but against that type of player you change and serve fast no-spin to the wide corners.How do you do the serve? First, learn a basic fast topspin serve. Contact the ball perhaps a foot behind the end-line, as low to the table as possible (below net height), with some topspin. Hit it so it hits as close to your own end-line as possible; this maximizes how much table you’ll have for the ball to drop on the far side. By serving crosscourt you’ll be able to serve faster, but you should also learn to serve it down the line and of course to the middle. If the ball hits near your end-line, crosses the net low, but doesn’t bounce within about six inches of the opponent’s end-line, then you haven’t maximized your speed.Put bottles or other targets on the far end of the table, right at the edge - one on each corner, and two where the opponents’ playing elbows would be. (One for a righty, one for a lefty.) Then practice serving fast and knocking them off. Until you can do this pretty consistently, you aren’t really controlling your serve. Use targets that won’t fall over or you’ll have to constantly pick them up. (But it’s fun to sometimes use paper cups and see how easily you can knock them off the table.)Now you’re ready for the real point-winner – a fast no-spin to the elbow. There’s only one difference between this and a regular fast topspin serve: at contact, instead of putting topspin on the ball, you hit the ball with a very slight downward motion. Don’t think heavy backspin; it’s more of a glancing downward blow to put a little backspin on the ball. If you serve no-spin, after two bounces on the table the ball has topspin. To truly deaden it, you need a little backspin at the start.Now work on speed. Because you won’t have topspin to pull the ball down, you won’t be able to serve a no-spin (or slight backspin) quite as fast as with topspin, but you can still serve it very fast. It just takes practice. Put the target where the opponent’s elbow would be, and practice hitting it as fast as you can. If you have trouble generating speed, stop trying to serve on the table and just serve as fast as you can. Then gradually work on getting the ball to hit the table, slowing down the serve only as much as necessary.The fast no-spin serve to the middle is not nearly as hard to learn as it might sound. You just have to put in a few hours of practice. And once learned, you’ll have it for the rest of your table tennis life – and the number of free points you’ll get from the serve over a lifetime will dwarf the time you spent on learning it.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2132title: May 25, 2015 - Performance vs. Resultsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Far too many players judge themselves by their results rather than their performance. While it’s importance to use results as goals, all you can really control is your performance. What’s the difference?Performance is what you do. Results are what happens based on the performances of both you and your opponent, as well as perhaps some luck. (Bad luck comes in many ways, such as nets and edges; bad draws, such as drawing a playing style you don’t play well against; or ill-timed injuries or illnesses.)It’s normal to be unhappy with a poor result. But there’s a huge difference between a high-performance loss and low-performance win. You need to judge them separately. There really are four possibilities:Happy with result/happy with performanceHappy with result/unhappy with performanceUnhappy with result/happy with performanceUnhappy with result/unhappy with performanceThefirst caseis win-win - go celebrate! Have a hot fudge banana split. That doesn’t mean you can relax and rest on your laurels. You might be able to coast and keep your current performance level, but guess what? The players you beat are all gunning for you, and will likely raise their performance, especially against you. So if you want to keep the same result, you need to continue to improve your performance.Thesecond caseis cause for celebration, but should leave you determined to play better. No hot fudge on your ice cream. You won, and should be happy with this result, but know you should have performed better. Perhaps you won because the other guy didn’t perform well enough or perhaps you got lucky. You should celebrate the win, but be dying to get to the playing hall to practice and get your performance to where it should be.Thethird caseis bittersweet. You played well, and yet you lost. Have some plain vanilla ice cream. Now you have to make a calculation: Do you want to put in the effort needed to improve your performance to the point where youmightchange the result? There are no guarantees; you may practice and train with the best coaches and still lose, even to the same player who might also improve his performance. But guess what? If you put in the time, your changes of changing the result to a win go up dramatically. And even if you don’t change the result in question, you’ll be a better player, and you will have better results overall.Thefourth caseis the toughest. You played poorly and of course have nothing to celebrate. No ice cream for you. You know you could have played better. You should be dying to get to the playing hall so you can practice and eventually put in the performance you know you can do. You may or may not change the result, but you’ll at least be satisfied that you did your best – and your chances of the changing the result to a win go up dramatically.In all four cases, you need to examine the match, see where you won and lost, and practice to improve your performance in both of those areas for next time. Bottom line: Judge your performance by your actual performance, and use results as goals to reach by improving your performance.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2126title: May 18, 2015 - Become a Player of Routinedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Nearly all top athletes are creatures of ritual. This isn’t superstition; it’s a way for them to systematically be at their best. This includes finding little ways to always be at their best physically, mentally, tactically, and equipmentally. (Yes, I just coined that term.)Physically, this means preparing for play the same way each time. This includes getting enough sleep at regular hours; eating properly (and a lot if you train a lot); hydration; and proper warm-up. Warming up isn’t just at the table; it means doing, for example, some easy jogging and stretching before play to get the body ready. Once at the table, it means going through a systematic practice routine that allows you to warm up and tune up all of your major techniques. It also means having snacks and drinks ready during a session.Mentally, this means preparing yourself so your mind is at its best for play. This is probably the most overlooked area. Nearly all top athletes have a routine for this. For example, many listen to music, often a specific song or musician, which gets them mentally ready. Others meditate to clear their minds. Most top players develop little rituals at the table as well, perhaps tapping the table with their hands or bouncing the ball a certain number of times before serving. Everyone needs to find their own way of doing this.Tactically, this means going over the tactics of the upcoming match (assuming you are about to play games). If you know the opponent (either from playing, watching, or scouting him), then you should decide what the most important things to remember should be, and usually get it down to a few simple items, such as 2-3 serves, 1-2 receives, and 1-2 rallying tactics. (This is slightly more than what a coach should tell you, but you should be able to deal with a few more things on your own, since you are choosing them.) Above all, remind yourself to stop and think about these things periodically during the match to make sure you are actually executing the needed tactics. The tactics should be flexible, and change as needed, but you should make a habit of always having a rough plan. If you don’t know the opponent, then your tactics should focus on what you want to do, and adjust as you learn how your opponent plays – which shouldn’t take long.Equipmentally, this means having the proper equipment on hand. There’s the obvious: your racket, covering, and shoes. Make sure they are in good condition. Then there’s the less obvious: backup rackets, towels (especially if it’s humid), and a wet cloth or paper towel to step on between points if the floors are slippery. Make a habit of making sure you have everything present and ready.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2121title: May 11, 2015 - Covering the Wide Backhanddate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Playing backhands at the start of a rally is easy, since you are in position. But what do you do when you've been moved to your wide forehand, and have to move quickly to cover the wide backhand? You have three movement options - diagonally in, diagonally sideways, and diagonally back.Diagonally In. For this, you would move in to cut the ball off quickly, before it has a chance to get past you. If you are a close to the table player, then this is what you'd want to do. You also might want to do this if you were moved off the table when covering the forehand; moving in gets you back to the table. By moving in and taking the ball more quickly, you rush the opponent, or at least don't give him time to wind up for his next shot. When moving in like this, most players block or drive the ball. At the advanced levels players can move in and backhand loop the ball, often on the rise. The downside of moving in, of course, is that you have little time, and so either simply don't have time to do so, or are rushed and so make mistakes. You don't want to rush your shots, so only move in if you have time, or if you are doing a relatively simple block.Diagonally Sideways. This is the most common way, and what I'd recommend for most players. This gives you time to do your best backhand shot, whether driving or looping, without backing up so much that your opponent has too much time. If you want to improve, you should endlessly practice moving side-to-side where you move mostly sideways. Many players may have a small diagonally in movement when covering the backhand because most players tend to take the ball quicker on the backhand side than the forehand, but if it's only a little, then it's essentially sideways.Diagonally Back. This is a defensive method, and should normally be done only when absolutely forced to. Players who strongly favor the forehand often find themselves rushing about playing the forehand, and when moved to the wide forehand, often have to back up to cover the wide backhand. If you are forced back in this way, you will most likely be spinning soft with the backhand or fishing, or (if really in trouble) chopping or lobbing. (If your style of play is chopping, then there's nothing wrong with this. But if you are an attacker who is forced to chop because of this, then you are probably at a disadvantage if forced to chop.) If you find yourself forced back in this way on the wide backhand, there are two things to consider. First, try and make your shot as effective as possible, given the circumstances - and that mostly means keeping your ball deep, ideally with good topspin. Second, consider what got you into this situation in the first place, and find ways to avoid this situation.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2114title: May 4, 2015 - Good Tactics Lead to Confidencedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Think about the last time you played a match and got nervous. Now ask yourself this: What were your tactics in that match? If you are like the overwhelming majority of players I've worked with over the years in that situation, you probably didn't have a strong game plan - you were probably just winging it. And so, unsure of what you were doing, you were (drum roll please) . . . unsure of what you were doing. And it is that lack of surety that often leads to nervousness.So next time you are nervous, ask yourself what your game plan is, and come up with a coherent one. Not only will this give your mind something to think about other than worrying about your upcoming doom, but it will give you the confidence that you know what you are doing. You still have to execute the shots, but it's a lot easier to be confident when you know what you are doing than when you don't. Plus, this confidence allows you to think a bit more clearly and so play even better tactics. In other words:Good Tactics => Confidence => Good Tactics => Even More ConfidenceLet's break this down. Suppose you get nervous in a match. Rather than just tell yourself not to be nervous, think tactically. Ask yourself what tactics you need to do to win. Keep it simple – that is key. Then execute those tactics in a flexible way. (Flexible as in be ready for anything, but use tactics to increase the chances of the rallies going the way you want them.) If you focus on simple tactics and execution, you may find the nervousness melting away as you've given your mind something simple to focus on. This leads to confidence and a clear mind, which leads to clear thinking and continued good tactical play, which leads to even more confidence. It's an upward spiral that leads to playing your best – or, as it's often called, playing in the zone.When I talk to players after losses, often they'll blame their loss on nervousness. It's only when I question them that the whole truth comes out!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2108title: April 27, 2015 - Your Ready Position - Think Basketballdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players play table tennis like they were playing pinball. They stand there, and when they have to move, they mostly just reach for the ball. The reason for this is a combination of two factors: they arenot ready to move, and they arenot in the habit of moving. These are two separate things.A coach could stress the proper ready stance and the importance of moving, and try to get the player to be ready to move and to develop the habit of doing so. And it might sink in. But there's an easier way. Put your racket aside. Now imagine you are covering someone in basketball. (Or an infielder in baseball or a goalie in soccer.) Don't think about it;just do it. Then examine what happens. Almost for certain your feet went a little wider, your weight went on the balls of the feet, your knees bent some and pointed outwards slightly, and you leaned forward slightly at the waist. Your knees were suddenly bouncy as you prepared to move in either direction. (You probably raised your arms as well; you can drop them now, but keep the free hand up some for balance.) You are now in a perfect ready position!You are nowready to move. Do this regularly, and you'll develop thehabit of moving. Your pinball days are over.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2102title: April 20, 2015  Visualize Serves for Feedbackdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When you serve, whether in a match or when practicing, you should always first visualize the serve in your mind. You should see the serve's entire path and everything it does before serving - the contact off your racket, its speed and spin, the first bounce, its path over the net (low, any curving due to spin), the second bounce on the far side, and where it bounces after that. You should also feel the contact in your head, whether a grazing contact to create great spin or sinking more into the sponge for more speed.Then serve, and observe if the reality matches what was in your mind. This gives feedback so that you can learn to control and develop the serve. Most players who have trouble controlling their serve (i.e. most) do not use this feedback, and so it's no surprise they can't control their serve. This also allows you to improve the serve by visualizing as it should be, and striving to match that.When practicing, perhaps play a game with yourself where you visualize different serves, and see if you can match what's in your head. Practice until you can do this with all of your serves, including both spin serves and fast, deep serves. Perhaps even put targets on the table and visualize hitting them, and then do so. Eventually you'll have the feel of any serve you can visualize in your head, and to repeat that serve you just have to match the feel of the serve that you've learned.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2095title: April 13, 2015 - How Many Serving Motions Should You Have?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you watch the top players you'll notice that most have only one or two basic serving motions that they use over and over. The majority just do forehand pendulum and reverse pendulum serves. This allows them to do every possible type of spin, including sidespin both ways. Most have a few "trick" serves they'll pull out sometimes, but the large majority of their serves are almost relentlessly the same few motions, though the spins vary quite a bit.But they are world-class players playing other world-class players, who are not particularly vulnerable to trick serves or varying service motions. That's not true of the large majority of players. Against them, you should also have only one or two basic serving motions that you use most of the time. But you will have a huge advantage if you can regularly pull out other serving motions, as long as you can do themeffectively.After a game or so, most players adjust to an opponent's serving motion. But what if you are able to pull out other ones, and keep them guessing? For example, after a few forehand pendulum (or regular or reverse), throw in a backhand serve, or tomahawk serve, or any of a zillion other possibilities. They key is not just throw out these serves as just "trick" serves, but actually learn to do them well. Otherwise they are one-serve wonders, which have value if used perhaps one time, but not much beyond that. Instead, develop these other serves so you can pull them perhaps out a few times each game, and perhaps get a few "easy" points.It takes a lot of practice to develop multiple serving motions, and just as much time getting comfortable using them in games (where you not only can do the serves, but get used to the various returns). It's a lot of work for a seemingly small return. But is it really a small return? Players spend years improving parts of their games only marginally. Perfect a new serving motion, and you may find opponents struggling against your serves later and later into games, including those all-important points near the end of a close game.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2089title: April 6, 2015 - Tiger Woods Distraction Drilldate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:It's always been strange to me how a problem faced by so many players is so rarely dealt with. And that is dealing with distractions. Over the years, how many matches have you lost because something distracted you and you lost your focus? What did you do to solve the problem?Most likely you just tried to keep your focus in practice matches. That's like developing your loop only by looping in practice matches. It's part of the solution, but you'll develop it a lot faster by doing drills that allow you to focus on that one aspect of your game. Similarly, if you want to work on your focus, find drills that allow you to focus on that one aspect.I'm going to give one example of how to work on this. When Tiger Woods was developing and practicing his strokes as an up-and-coming junior, his dad would sometimes jingle keys or do other distractions. Tiger learned to focus completely on what he was doing, and the result was nothing could cause him to lose his focus.You can do the same. It may seem silly, but why not sometimes practice or play practice matches where someone does exactly that - jingles keys, plays distracting music or news, or just talks to you. Your job isn't to just ignore him; that's not the point. Your job is to tune him out so you don't really notice him, so that your entire focus is on what you are doing, like an absent-minded professor who doesn't notice his house is on fire. You need to be so focused and inside yourself that you truly don't pay attention to outside distractions. When you can do that, you'll never have a problem with distractions again.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2080title: March 30, 2015 - Technical Problems Often Come in Pairsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you think about it, this is somewhat obvious - and yet most don't really think about it when fixing a technique, leading to great difficulties in making these changes. They'll try to fix one part of the technique, but unless they fix both parts at the same time, the technique won't work properly.Imagine a player with perfect technique. Now imagine changing something so his technique is no longer perfect. He'll likely have to compensate somewhere else in his technique for this change or his shots will no longer hit the table. Similarly, a player with one poor part of his technique will almost always have at least one other poor part to compensate.For example, let's suppose a player's backswing is too short on a loop. To compensate, the player will likely swing more violently to gain the racket speed, leading to a poorly-controlled jerky stroke. To fix this he has to both extend the backswing while slowing down the acceleration to a smoothly controlled swing.Or suppose a player hits or loops forehands with his right foot (for righties) too far back. To compensate he'll likely have less waist rotation (since otherwise he'll literally be facing backwards during the backswing, leading to an awkward and less-powerful stroke. To fix the problem he has to both bring the right foot a bit more forward while increasing the waist rotation.Or suppose the opposite, that the player hits or loops forehand with his right foot slightly forward (i.e. a backhand position) or even with the left foot (for a player who doesn't have a supple waist and/or spend many hours each week training like top players who correctly do this). The player will likely find it difficult to rotate the body properly in the time needed in a rally, and so will tend to stroke with only the upper body and arm, again leading to an awkward and less-powerful stroke. To fix the problem he has to both adjust the foot position and increase the body rotation. (Note how both improper foot positions lead to difficulties with using the lower body and proper body rotation.)The same is true of a player who plays with his two feet parallel to each other, which makes it harder to rotate the lower body, and so leads again to an awkward and less-powerful stroke. Again, both the foot position and the body rotation need to be adjusted. Telling him to do one without the other won't help.Or imagine a player who stands too far off the table when forehand looping against backspin, a common problem. He'll have to reach forward too much in his swing, and so to keep his balance will have to pull back with his left side, and so fall backwards slightly, leading to a loss of power and balance. Telling the player not to fall backward won't help unless you also tell him to stand closer to the table. His contact point with the ball may be the same, but it won't be so far in front of him.Another common problem is the player who lifts his elbow during his forehand drive, leading to the racket angle changing from too open to closed during the stroke, making it hard to control what the angle is right at contact. If you tell him to stop lifting the elbow without also focusing on starting the forward swing with the racket in the proper angle he'll have great difficulties.Sometimes there are more than two roots to the problem. If a player stands up too straight, this forces all sorts of adjustments to compensate. When the player tries to stay lower with a wider stance and knees more bent (as he should), he'll have to change a number of aspects (for the better) to his stroking technique. But if he doesn't make these changes, his new stance and stroking techniques will be awkward.There are many more examples like this. What technique problems do you have in your game, and is the root of the problem singular or plural?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2076title: March 23, 2015 - Macho or Tricky?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the toughest decisions a player has to make when serving under pressure - or at any other time - is whether to go "macho" or "tricky." Here's a Tip of the Week on the topic,Trick Serves and Third-Ball Serves, with third-ball serves the same as what I'm calling macho serves here.Going macho means you serve mostly to set up a third-ball attack, knowing that you will have to follow it up with a strong attack. Most often these serves will give the server a return he server can attack, but the receivers generally don't miss these serves outright, and the server does have to make a good shot or sequence of shots to win the point.Going tricky means pulling out a serve where you are trying to win the point outright with the serve, either by the receiver missing the serve or giving an easy pop-up. The weakness of these serves is that if the receiver reads them well, they are often easier to attack then third-ball serves. They tend to be all or nothing serves, where either the receiver misses, or the receiver attacks the serve. (Of course, if the opponent plays passively, then things are different - challenge them over and over with trick serves, since there's little danger of them attacking them.)So which should you choose? First off, you should have complete confidence that you can win by going "macho," knowing that you can follow up your serve. At the world-class level, theses serves dominate. At the same time, you want to play the percentages - that's all tactics is, playing the percentages, and so that's all you should be thinking about here. You can't put an exact percentage on it, but you should be asking yourself, "Do I have a serve he keeps missing?"Sometimes you might even have a serve you haven't used yet, and pull it out at the end - but I don't recommend that. If it's such a good serve that it should win you a point, use it earlier, both to win the point and to verify it'll work. If it does, then hold back on it for a time until the opponent isn't ready, then pull it out again. Why pull out a tricky serve at deuce when you could pull it out early in the game and perhaps again in the middle (and perhaps not go to deuce), and again late in the game if needed?Some players prefer to go to simple "macho" third-ball serves under pressure because they are more likely to give predictable returns, which simplifies things. And most of your serves should be of this type, with the trick serves thrown in for a few free points.So it's all about the percentages. With experience, you'll get a feel for which type of serve to pull in those pressure-packed moments.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2068title: March 15, 2015 - To Play the Middle and Wide Corners You Have to Practice to Themdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the most basic concepts in sports is that you must practice what you want to do in a match. The corollary to this is that what you do in practice is what you'll tend to do in a match. And yet, when it comes to ball placement, these are two of the most forgotten concepts in table tennis.It's a basic tactical principle that most of your shots should go either to a wide angle - often outside the corners, to force your opponent to move and cover more ground - or at the opponent's middle, which is usually his playing elbow, the midpoint between his forehand and backhand, where he has to make a quick decision on whether to play a forehand or backhand, and then move into position. (There are also short balls, but that's a separate issue.) And so it's somewhat obvious that you'd want to practice putting balls to wide angles and to the middle, right? And yet, watch most practice drills, and you'll see that in the overwhelming majority of drills, players play to the corners, but no wider, and almost never to the middle. And so they are 1) not practicing what they want to do in a match, and 2) since what they do in practice is what they'll tend to do in a match, guess what they'll tend to do in a match?So perhaps add two types of drills to your practice regimen. First, instead of drills where (for example) one player loops and other blocks, and it's all corner-to-corner, do this same drill, except both players go as wide as they comfortably can. The looper should try looping the balloutsidethe corner, often with hooking sidespin to go even wider. The blocker should take the ball quick off the bounce, which gives him the widest angle into the looper's forehand, and so he should block the ball as wide as possible. This doesn't mean going for risky extremes; it means going as wide as youcomfortablycan go. If you go too wide, you get less and less table, and will lose consistency.You can do many similar drills. For example, when going backhand to backhand in a drill, why not focus on hitting balls a little bit outside the corners? There is an obvious advantage to going right at the corners, since it gives you more table and so it's safer, so you should find the right balance of when to go to the corner, and when to go for more angle.Second, do drills where you go to the middle over and over. The most basic way is one player attacks the other's middle, while the other blocks from the middle, either forehand or backhand. The blocker can do this drill either by blocking with just forehand or just backhand over and over, or he can move back into a neutral position after each shot, and then react to the next shot with forehand or backhand. The result of such a drill? The attacker gets in the habit of attacking the middle, and so is able to do so in matches. The blocker practices something he will often see in matches - attacks to his middle - but rarely practices against, and so is rarely prepared for. And so both players improve their middle play.So try out these drills, or come up with your own that allow you to practice placing the ball at wide angles and to the middle, perhaps by matching patterns you see in matches. And then do in matches what you do in practice!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2062title: March 9, 2015 - Playing in Poor Conditionsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Playing a tournament in absolutely perfect conditions is like that mythical annual vacation at the beach where everything goes perfect. But life is not a beach vacation, and neither is table tennis. You not only should be prepared for poor conditions, and as players, you shouldexpectthem. This doesn't mean you should just accept them; by all means work to make sure tournament and club directors have great conditions. But as players you have to adapt to the playing environment. Tactical players adapt; non-tactical players complain. Here's a short primer.Slippery floors. If your club has great floors, there's nothing more frustrating than showing up at a tournament primed to play like greased lightning, only to find you're playing on a skating rink. Most major tournaments are played on concrete or wood floors, and unless they are treated properly, they will be slippery. So what can you do?First, have a good pair of table tennis shoes. They are designed to give the best possible traction. Make sure to have a new pair as worn-out ones won't give as much traction. Many players who play at clubs with good floors get lazy on this, letting their shoes wear out, and don't realize this until they are stuck on slippery floors. I suggest getting news ones for such tournaments, and use them only when needed, until the ones you use in practice are falling apart.Second, step on a wet cloth between points. Watch the top players and you'll see this all the time if they aren't playing on good floors. It can be a wet paper towel or a cloth, it doesn't matter. You'll get much better traction after stepping on it for several points.Third, use it to your advantage. Players can't move as well on slippery floors, so move them around!Poor lighting or background. There's only one good answer here - adjust. You do this by practicing. One common mistake is that sometimes only one side has a bad background. So make sure to practice on both sides of the table, and on any tables you might play on that might have bad backgrounds.And once again, use it to your advantage. If the lighting or background is poor, it's harder for players to follow the ball. This favors attackers, since defenders are trying to pick up on a fast-moving ball. This doesn't mean wild attacks, but when it's harder to see, play a bit more aggressively, and expect shorter rallies.Bad tables, balls, or a breeze. This means the ball is going to take funny hops, or move about in the breeze. It's going to be difficult to play well, so accept that. Rallies will tend be short, and will favor the player who focuses on consistency. This doesn't mean completely changing your game, but focus on keeping the ball in play and letting the opponent make mistakes off the erratic movement of the ball. (Note - there are generally two types of "bad" tables - ones with slippery surfaces, where the ball slides, and ones where the ball dies when it hits near the side-lines or end-lines. Good tables have tops that are thick enough - usually one inch - so the ball bounces consistently all over the surface.)Humidity. There's nothing more frustrating than doing that perfect loop you've done ten thousand times before, and the ball slides off your racket into the net. When it's humid, both the ball and racket can get damp, and it'll change the characteristics of how the ball comes off your racket. How do you combat this?First, make sure to have a dry towel to dry your racket and the ball off with. If you sweat a lot, you should bring two towels, one for you, one for the racket and ball. Then use the towel(s) a lot, making sure the racket, ball, and your hands are dry. (A wet non-playing hand means the ball gets wet; a wet playing hand means you can't grip the racket very well.)Second, adapt tactically. You won't be able to overpower an opponent with spin, so loopers have to either go to more drive loops (sinking the ball into the sponge, and so less spin, more speed, not as consistent), or steady loops where you mostly keep the rally going. Hitters and blockers have the advantage here, so you might do more of that - but often they too have problems with the humidity as it changes the friction on their racket, and so they block loops into the net. One of the most successful ways to play in humid conditions against a looper is to simply dead block over and over, and watch the poor looper try to loop with any effectiveness.Cold. I've seen many players in the winter struggle in their early matches because their racket is cold - and they often don't even notice it. Or they aren't warmed up because their racket was cold when they were warming up, and now that the racket is warmer, it's playing different than it was when they were warming up. A cold racket plays deader. So if you are driving to a tournament and it's cold outside, keep your racket inside the car with you, not in the trunk where it'll get cold.Finally, a reminder - when faced with bad conditions, you can either surrender to them and lose, or take advantage of them and win. Save the complaining for when you aren't playing, which usually meansafterthe tournament is done.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2054title: March 2, 2015 - When Should You Go for a Winner?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:All players need good put-away shots, whether it be forehand or backhand loops or smashes. But when should you use them? Here are four theories on this.When the ball is high. Patiently work until you get that high ball, and don't get impatient and go for a crazy shot.When the ball lands toward the middle of the table, depth-wise. These are often easy to put away or at least attack strongly. It's why coaches stress keeping the ball mostly short at the start of a point (by serving or pushing short) and mostly deep once the rally begins. Most soft topspin and backspin shots that don't go deep but don't die over the table (i.e. backspin balls that would bounce twice given the chance) should at least be attacked pretty hard, and by the advanced intermediate level they should be consistently put away.The 51% Ogimura Doctrine- if you have a 51% chance of making your put-away (assuming your opponent can't return it), you go for it. If he may return it, you need a higher percentage.Flashbulb Theory of Larry(FTL). With experience, there'll come times when a little flashbulb goes off in your head that tells you that you have read the ball perfectly and are in perfect position. The ball might be low and deep, and ripping it might be seemingly difficult, but if that flash bulb goes off, then you should probably take the shot. In fact, not taking the shot could throw you off due to indecision. Of course, the key here is having an accurate flash bulb that only goes off when you really have read the ball and are set to take the shot - and that takes experience. And even when that flashbulb goes off, you don't have to hit the ball Faster Than Light, just hard enough to win the point.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2047title: February 23, 2015 - Shadow Practice When You Missdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Table tennis is a game of technique, timing, and adjustment. When you miss a shot, that means something went wrong with your technique or timing. That means something went wrong with your muscle memory, which includes both the technique and timing. So what should you do to get back and reinforce that muscle memory?You shadow practice the shot. Immediately after missing, before whatever went wrong has a chance to become part of your muscle memory, do it therightway. Imagine the same incoming ball you just missed against, including its speed, spin, and location. Then shadow practice the shot the way you should have done it, and visualize the ball doing what it was supposed to do, i.e. the perfect shot. This is how you reinforce the correct muscle memory. Put the feel of the miss out of your memory; thinking about it only reinforces in your muscle memory something you don't want reinforced.This is especially important for beginning and intermediate players, whose muscle memory is not as developed, but advanced players should do this as well to re-enforce the proper muscle memory. Ultimately, this is the goal of the constant practice needed to become a top player - the primary purpose is to develop and reinforce those muscle memories so they'll remember to come out when needed in a match.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2043title: February 16, 2015 - Playing Off-Table Two-Winged Topspinnersdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Some players like to step off the table and just topspin away, turning many opponents into blockers who are jammed at the table, unable to do anything other than struggle to keep the ball in play. These topspinners can seemingly go on forever, and eventually either outlast or wear out the blocker, or find an easy ball to loop away. At higher levels, such players are often overpowered, as it's the very nature of their game that the opponent can take the attack - but it takes a certain level of strokes and footwork to do this consistently. And often this is exactly what the off-table topspinner wants his opponent to do, to try to overpower him, and thereby make mistakes.So how does one beat such a player? Here are some standard tactics.Bring him in and then attack. Do this with short serves and short receives, and then catch him too close to the table with your first attack, before he can get into his comfortable off-table pocket. Since these players hang off the table, attacking their serve often plays right into their game. You don't have to win the point on the first attack after bringing them in; it's sufficient to force a weak return that you can follow up with a winner.Get your forehand into play.Because he plays off the table, you have more time to get your forehand into position, rather than just block. You might have to take a half step off the table to give yourself time. (Many players get stuck blocking because they are too jammed at the table, and so don't have time to do more than block.) It's important that you punish the opponent for his soft play by attacking, and especially being ready to attack when you get a weak return, in particular balls that land short. When the ball does land short, blast a winner to a wide angle or right at the opponent's playing elbow (midway between forehand and backhand). (If your forehand is so weak that you cannot attack these soft topspins when you are in position, then you need to work on your forehand attack.)Mostly attack the middle and wide backhand.Generally avoid the forehand, where most off-table topspinnners have more range, get more spin, and have better counter-attacks. (So generally, when going after the middle, perhaps aim itslightlytoward the backhand side.) But it depends on the player. Some off-table topspinners are more vulnerable on the forehand side. Unless he's simply a much better player, he's unlikely to beat you in a duel between his off-table backhand, where he has to cover both his wide backhand and middle, against your forehand looping or smashing, assuming you don't try to overpower him on one shot. Players like this often seem open to the wide the corners, but in reality they usually cover that area pretty well. So make sure to go to both the wide backhand and middle, and perhaps the wide forehand, depending on the player. (This was one of the reasons Ilija Lupulesku was so successful for years despite backing off the table so much - players relentlessly went after his wide backhand and didn't go after his middle nearly enough.)Change the pace.Do this with either soft loops or soft blocks. Find out early which side he's more vulnerable to a change of pace, but it's usually on the forehand side. This is where a chop or sidespin block can be valuable. He'll likely make a weak return that you can attack, often catching him too close to the table or throwing off his time. If an opponent gets into a rhythm where he's getting everything back, it's imperative that you change the pace to throw off that rhythm.Be patient.Your goal isn't to blast a winner every shot; your goal is to play for an easy ball to blast for a winner, usually a ball that lands short that you can blast to a wide corner or right at his middle.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2036title: February 9, 2015 - Pulling Off Big Upsetsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:While I always urge players to compete to win events, let's face it - one of the great thrills of table tennis is pulling off a great upset. So let's look at how to maximize your chances of doing so.First, let's define "great upset" as beating someone who really is much better than you. If you've improved a lot and beat someone rated a lot higher only because you are underrated, that's not really a "great upset"; that just means you've gotten better. And that, of course, is better than pulling off a one-time great upset!But whatever your current level is, you still want to maximize your chances of pulling off an occasional big upset. How do you do this? There are three main reasons why big upsets take place. They are: 1) the weaker player plays great; 2) the stronger player plays poorly; and 3) the weaker player wins because of a style advantage.Note that tactical play comes into play in all three. The weaker player may play "well" because of smart tactics, the stronger player may play "poorly" because of poor tactics, and the weaker player may have a style advantage only because he plays smart tactics to make use of that style advantage, or because the stronger player plays poor tactics.The reality is that most major upsets involve at least a little of all three. You have control over only how well you play, and so a key to pulling off upsets is to simply play well, so that opportunistically you are ready to win if the stronger player opens the door by playing poorly, or if it turns out you have some sort of style advantage.Let's look at all three of these aspects.1) Weaker Player Playing WellSome would argue that the key to beating stronger players is to play super-aggressive and hope you get hot. This rarely works, and usually just makes things easier for the stronger player. What does work is to simply do whatever you do best, but do it as well as you can - while at the same time having at least one shot that consistently wins points against the stronger player. You don't need to force the winning shot over and over; if you do, you'll just start missing. But it needs to be there when you need it, and you should maximize how often you can use it. It might not be a one-shot putaway; it might be a series of shots, such as an aggressive backhand, quick blocking, or steady looping.Psychologically, you need to go into the match really believing you can win. You really should do this in all matches, no matter how good the opponent is. Even if you can't beat someone, you'll do a lot better if you play believing you can, and play accordingly. This puts you in a perfect mental condition to win - you won't start thinking about the big upset you are about to pull off (and thereby fall apart) because you'll beexpectingto win.You also need to get into "the zone," that mental place where you are playing almost unconsciously, where everything happens naturally. Most players have had this experience sometime; they key is to reproduce it while playing. Once in the "the zone," you can maximize your level and your chances of winning.It doesn't matter whether you are about to pull off a big upset because the opponent is playing poorly, you are playing well, or if you have a style advantage; in all three cases if you start to think about the upset you are about to pull off, you will likely be pulled out of the "zone" you were in, and your level of play will drop.2) Stronger Player Playing PoorlyYou can maximize the chances of the stronger player not playing well by throwing variation at him. If you give him the same serves, receives, and rallying shots over and over, he'll get used to them, get into a rhythm, and mostly likely play his level. So perhaps throw more variations than normal against him, especially with your serves, and keep him off balance. It's a common way to blow a match, where a player finds something that works, but so overuses it that it stops working. You want to stick with what works, but you also want to stretch it out so it lasts the entire match. At the same time, once you find something that works, you want to maximize its usage without overusing it so that he gets used to it. It's a fine balance.If you do find something that gives the stronger player trouble, here's a simple way to maximize its usage without wearing it out: use it early in a game, again in the middle, and then come back to it at the end. Often I've seen players hold back on a tricky serve, a heavy push, or something else until it's close, when if they used this earlier, the game might never be close.3) Style AdvantageIf you have a style advantage, you also maximize your chances of winning if you go in truly believing you can win. Psychologically, when you are about to beat a stronger player it's very easy to start thinking about it and thereby fall apart. Instead, if you really have a style that gives the stronger player problems, convince yourself of the truth: he is not a "stronger" player, except perhaps against other players - and he's not playing other players, he's playingyou!However, one of the things about stronger players is that they often adjust. This means you also need to make adjustments as the match goes on to keep that style advantage. If there's something you do that gives the stronger player problems, he'll likely look for ways to avoid that, even if it means playing his "B" game. Your job is to either find ways to keep using whatever gives him trouble, or to find ways to beat his "B" game. In the latter case, your style advantage has already done its job, forcing the stronger player to play this "B" game, and suddenly he might not necessarily be the "stronger player."A key aspect of having a style advantage is knowing what gives the stronger player trouble, so you can use that part of your style that does give him trouble, i.e. the style advantage. Sometimes this will happen automatically, if your styles just happens to be one that gives him fits. More often it helps to do a little scouting, and find out what gives that player problems. Watch him play, ask around, experiment early in the match, and learn all you can. Information is power, and often leads to victory.There are few more tactical matches then a clash that occurs when a stronger player faces a weaker player with a style advantage. Can he tactically adjust? Can the weaker player tactically keep using whatever it is in his style that works, or force the stronger player into his "B" game? Matches like this is where you need to put on your tactical cap and win the tactical battle. At the same time, remember that tactics should be simple. Don't overthink; find a few simple tactics that work, adjust them as needed as the match goes on, and focus on playing your best.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2029title: February 2, 2015date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Develop the Five Types of Rallying ShotsThere really are only five types of rallying shots, and you should perfect them all. If you can't, your game is not complete and you'll never be as good as you could be. So what are these five types of shots you should develop?Opening AttacksThere are your first attacks in a rally. Against a ball that goes long this usually means looping, though you can also do a more simple drive. Against a short ball this means a flip (usually called a flick in Europe). A surprising number of seemingly defensive or passive players actually have good attacks once they are into the rally, but they don't have effective or consistent opening attacks, and so they are usually on the defensive.Continuing AttacksIt's not enough to open with an attack; you have to continue the attack. At the higher levels this usually means to loop over and over. You can also continue your attack with regular drives, which is especially common the backhand. This is often the most physical aspect of table tennis as you are forced to move quickly to keep up an attack.PutawaysIf you can't end the point when the shot is there, then you are severely handicapped. This means loop kills and smashes. (One of the best way to develop your putaway shots is with multiball practice.)ConsistencyThe game isn't all attack. Consistency shots include regular drives, blocks, steady loops, pushing, as well as defensive off-table shots chopping, lobbing, and fishing. There is overlap here with "Continuing Attacks" as a steady loop can fit both categories. Consistency shots are best used at the start of the rally to return serves (such as pushing or a soft-to-medium-speed loop) and to withstand an opponent's attack.Tricky ShotsThese are the often unorthodox shots, ones where you throw something different at an opponent to make him uncomfortable. Examples would be a change of pace, drop shot, no-spin shots that look like spin, an unexpectedly heavy spin (such as a very heavy push), an unexpected sidespin (such as a sidespin block or loop, both of which you can sidespin either way), or a last-second change of direction. You probably don't want to center your game around these types of shots, but if you don't have at least a small arsenal of tricky shots to throw off an opponent then you are handicapping yourself. Even all-out attackers use such tricky shots on occasion, such as on receive or with sidespin loops, or sudden changes of direction.Now examine your game, and ask yourself which of the above are you very good at? You can develop your game around these shots. However, the more important question is probably which of them are you weak at? (Rather than rate them relative to your current level, rate them relative to the level you are striving to reach.) Now you know what to work on. Go to it.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2024title: January 26, 2015 - Play the Balldate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Often players ask me how to play different surfaces. There are obvious and easy answers for that, and beginners do need to know how the various surfaces play different. For example, long pips tends to return whatever spin you give it, and they need to understand that to be able to play it. Short pips tends to return flatter (i.e. less spinny) then you'd expect from the more common inverted. And so on.But the more important thing is to simply learn to play the ball. You don't really need to know that long pips will return your spin, except perhaps as a help at the start of a match. Very early in any match you'll see how your opponent's surfaces and strokes return your shots, and that's what you need to play. For example, knowing that long pips will return your spin is fine, but some types return more than others, and some strokes with long pips return more than others. Players need to match what actually is happening in a match to how they react, not just memorize something they can read in a book.The same is true of adjusting to an opponent's strokes. If he does something strange, ignore the strangeness and just adjust to playing the balls he's giving you. (And remember that if a player has strange shots, then there's a reason they are strange shots - they are not orthodox, and so likely have major technical weaknesses in them, if you can find them.)Once a player understands how the ball comes off an opponent's racket and strokes in a match, he can play the balls he's getting, knowing what they'll be based on how they have been coming off the racket so far. Then he can figure out how to adjust, and what type of shots he should do to get the type of balls he wants. For example, you might have trouble against the fast dead shots of a pips-out player. But then you'll realize that you have to contact the ball differently, perhaps lifting slightly more with more topspin (assuming you are a topspin player), and even noting that if you keep the ball deep, you have more time to react and adjust to these deader balls. You could read that in a book or article, but it'll sink in a lot better when you actually face such a situation and adjust, learn to play the ball your opponent is giving you, and actually make the adjustment and win!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2021title: January 19, 2015 - The Lost Art of Messing People Update_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When I throw chop blocks or sidespin pushes at my students, they complain, saying "Nobody does that!" And that's the problem - few players do these type of things anymore, and so when faced with shots that mess them up, instead of learning to do these shots themselves they point out that nobody does it - and so nobody does it!Why don't players do these type of shots very often? Because the very best players in the world only do these shots occasionally. But that's because they players they are competing against are also the very best players in the world, and if you are one of the best players in the world, you have fewer problems with these types of shots. And yet many top players still do these type of shots. At the finals of Men's Singles at the recent USA Nationals, down 5-1 in the seventh, Jim Butler did three sidespin blocks the rest of the way, and won all three points. And if you watch the top players when they push serves back long, you'll be surprised at how often they do so with sidespin.Sure, you could robotically attack every ball with the same straightforward shots that everyone uses. Or you could get a little creative, and mess up your opponents, and become a better player. It's great fun - both the messing up opponents and becoming a better player!Here are some ways to mess up an opponent.Chop or sidespin block.Here's how.Push long with sidespin, usually so the ball curves out to the corners.Here's how.Last-second changes of directions with pushes.Here's how.Dummy loop, i.e. a loop that looks spinny but isn't.Here's how.Changing directions at the last second when looping.Here's how.Attack the middle.Here's how.Mess them up with deep, tricky serves.Here's how.Here's more.Vary your receive against short backspin serves.Here's how.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2015title: January 12, 2015 - Develop Your Primary and Secondary Skillsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:To play at any level you have to have something you can use to win points at that level. Typically this means a big forehand or backhand, tricky serves, a strong counter-hitting or blocking game, or perhaps defensive skills such as chopping. These are a player's point-winning skills, which might be called his primary skills.But there are also secondary skills which set up the point-winning skills. Having a big forehand loop, for example, doesn't always help if you don't have ways to set it up via these secondary skills, such as a good serve, a good receive, a spinny opening loop, a good backhand, or just fast footwork to get the player into position in a rally for the big loop.Serves can be both a primary point-winning skill or a secondary set-up one. Players with big breaking spin serves (often long) often use them as a point-winning skill, either winning the point outright or setting up such a weak return that it essentially wins the point outright. Others have simpler-looking serves that are usually short and low, with varied spin (often backspin or no-spin that looks like backspin), that force defensive returns that might not win the point directly, but consistently set up a primary attack, usually a strong opening loop. (Receivers will generally make fewer outright mistakes against such short serves that don't have the big spinny break of a deeper serve, but because the serves are short and because they aren't always sure of the spin at first they tend to receive passively.)Often a player seems to have a primary point-winning skill when in fact his strength is a secondary skill that sets up a point-winning one - and the point-winning one simply seems strong because he gets so many weak returns to use it against. But against stronger players, whose returns aren't as weak, the primary skill might not be so strong. These players can improve dramatically by improving the point-winning skill. Similarly, players with big point-winning skills might fall apart against stronger players who don't give them the big point-winning shot so easily. These players can improve dramatically by improving their secondary set-up skills.Developing secondary set-up skills have a huge secondary advantage. They set the player up to attack over and over, resulting in lots and lots of attacking practice, i.e. point-winning skills, and so those primary point-winning skills improve dramatically. That's why developing good set-up serves, for example, will lead to lots of attack practice and thereby a much improved attack, leading to a higher level of play.Examine your game and decide what your strengths are. If they are primary point-winning skills, then perhaps focus on developing secondary skills to set up these point-winning skills. If they are secondary set-up skills, then perhaps focus on developing primary skills to win the point. Often players get stuck at a level because they are missing one of these types of skills.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2009title: January 5, 2015 - Hitting or Looping?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:In the past this was always a difficult question - should you be a hitter or a looper? It's a difficult question for many at the non-elite levels, but at higher levels there's not much question anymore - pretty much everyone is a looper. (When I refer to hitting, that includes blocking, so perhaps it would be better called a "hitter/blocker." Of course loopers also block, but not as much as a hitter/blocker style.)Unless your goal is to be a world-class player (say, top 100 in the world), you can go either way. Players who start out young, once they've developed the basics, should probably focus on looping as their potential is high. Players who start older can also loop, but let's face it - if you start, say, in your thirties or forties, you are unlikely to be world-class. In this case it's a question of where are you more talented, and what do you prefer?If you want to play the way the world-class players play - style-wise, not necessarily level-wise - then become a looper. If you have loose, relaxed muscles, looping will also be easier. Bigger, stronger players also tend to find looping easier. On the other hand, if you are very quick, then perhaps hitting is your forte. In some ways it's a dying style as few coaches teach it anymore except to older players - but that's also an advantage as players aren't used to playing this type of style as much as in the past. You might even consider using short pips, and really mess up some players who only know how to play inverted.Whichever you go for, turn your looping or hitting into a weapon. Develop your serve, receive, and rallying shots to set up this shot. You want it to be a terror for opponents, who lose points both to that shot and in their attempts to not set the shot up for you - a double whammy. Perhaps work with a coach or top player on the shot, use it every chance you can in drills and games, and whether you are looping or hitting soon you'll have a true weapon.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2004title: December 29, 2014 - Brick-Wall Blocking Defensedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Ever play one of those players who can seemingly blockeverythingback? How do they do that? It's almost as if they are playing the video game Pong - they just don't miss. You can do the same thing. Here are three keys.First, get your racket behind the ball. This may sound simple, but it's key. If you get the racket behind the ball, then all you have to do is have the right racket angle, and the ball goes back! But how do you get the racket behind the ball? That involves proper ready stance, a clear mind, and moving your feet.A proper ready stance means you are equally ready to move either direction. This usually means the racket tip is pointing directly at the opponent's contact point. (Some players who contact the ball quicker on the backhand hold the racket slightly turned to the backhand, since they have less time to react on that side. If they do, they often compensate by having their feet in a slight forehand stance.)A clear mind means you are ready to react to the ball rather than trying to anticipate. Just watch the opponent as he hits the ball and react. Don't think or guess; just react. The only time you anticipate is when you have popped the ball up so weakly that guessing where the ball is going the only way you can react to the next shot. However, if you can read where your opponent is going early in his stroke, that's not anticipation - that's reacting, and you should react. Never react so early as to let the opponent see this early enough that he can change directions.Moving your feet means exactly that - step to the ball rather than just reach. Some do get away with mostly reaching, but that limits your range and hurts your control.Second, good contact. This means blocking firmly against heavy topspin. If you just hold the racket out, the spin will take on your racket and shoot up. So put a bit of firmness into the shot. Learn to use the same contact every time so you can develop your timing and precision - and then learn to change speeds.Third, practice. Lots and lots of practice. There are plenty of players looking to work on their attack, so oblige them. The more you practice your blocking the more you'll become one of those players who seemingly blockeverythingback.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/2002title: December 15, 2014 - Backhand Footworkdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players do lots and lots of forehand footwork drills. This allows many of them to dominate the table with their forehand. But there's often a missing ingredient here - backhand footwork.Backhand footwork is similar to forehand footwork - you need to learn to move side to side as well as in and out. For example, a coach or partner simply hits the ball side to side to the backhand side, one toward the middle, one to the corner or wider. The player moves side to side, playing backhands. Players who don't do this often have trouble covering the backhand side effectively. They can move all over the forehand court fluidly, but on the backhand side they are in trouble. Often this means either weak and erratic backhands, or wild swats.Often coaches don't work on this much. Why? First, the forehand tends to be the stronger shot, and so coaches and players stress that - and so do lots of forehand footwork drills. Second, many forehand footwork drills incorporate backhands as part of the drill, and so they do get some backhand footwork practice this way, and so think they are doing sufficient backhand footwork drills. However, most of these drills only cover moving from the forehand side to the backhand side, not just moving around on the backhand side itself. Third, by the time players reach the intermediate stage they have developed forehands and so are doing lots of forehand footwork drills - but often the backhand isn't as developed, and so coaches have them focus on continued technique development rather than moving about playing backhand. Many intermediate players are making the transition from normal backhand drives to topspinning their backhands, and coaches are reluctant to have them work on this and do footwork at the same time. (This one doesn't apply to coaches who introduce forehand and backhand topspin shots to developing players at about the same time, as more and more modern coaches tend to do.) And fourth, by the time the player does have a solid topspin backhand, both the coach and the player aren't in the habit of doing backhand footwork drills in their sessions, and so they just don't do them.All this can lead to a weakness in the player's game as they don't move around as well as they could in covering the backhand side. This is a problem as the backhand by its very nature is a more cramped shot, with the body in the way, and so being able to move about and attack with the backhand is key.Besides side to side backhand footwork, you can also try in and out. Ideally, learn to topspin both, but especially the one from off the table. You should also do random backhand footwork, where balls are played randomly to the backhand and you play aggressive backhands. You can also have your coach or partner attack randomly to your backhand so you can work on your backhand blocking footwork, or perhaps topspin defend from a few steps back.Eric Owens attributed his upset win over Cheng Yinghua in Men's Singles at the 2001 USA Nationals to backhand footwork drills. Learn from the champions!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1994title: December 8, 2014 - Keep Your Strokes Simpledate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the secrets of coaching is that most of it isn't teaching someone what to do; it's teaching them whatnotto do. There's a reason top players make it look so easy - their strokesareeasy, because they are simple and relatively short. There's no wasted motion, and very few actual components to each stroke - and the each part of the stroke naturally leads to the next. A good stroke is symphony of simplicity.The best strokes are basically the most efficient ways of getting the racket to go from Point A to Point B while creating maximum power. Roughly speaking, correct grip and foot positioning are each one-fourth of the battle. Learning where Point A is - where the racket should backswing to, and the rest of the body's backswing motion - is another one-fourth of the battle. Then letting the shot go naturally and with proper contact is the final one-fourth. If you get the grip, foot positioning, and backswing correct, the rest is natural, though it is often amazing how many weird (and technically poor) incarnations of the stroke players can come up with. Most of these involve flopping the wrist or elbow, or holding back on part of the swing, such as stopping the body rotation so that you stroke mostly with arm, or swinging only with the upper body. Once you have this perfect (or near-perfect) stroke, then it's just a matter of developing the timing to turn it into a weapon of pong destruction.Done properly, a good stroke is a thing of beauty that channels great power with minimal effort and maximum efficiency. It's the cartographical equivalent of driving from Point A to Point B. A coach's primary job is to get you buckled in properly for this journey (grip and foot positioning), get the backswing right (get you to Point A), and then set you on your way to Point B with no detours, and nothing but constant acceleration through the halfway point (contact) and continuing to Point B.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1987title: December 1, 2014date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Do you have a game plan when you play? Or do you just wing it and hope?Many players mostly wing it, to their detriment. Most have patterns they use, but often they haven't really thought them through. Every serve and receive should have purpose; otherwise, you are playing without purpose. Often the plans they do have don't take into consideration the opponent's strengths and weaknesses. For example, if you are a looper, you probably have patterns to set up your loop, but how much do you focus on adjusting these techniques and your loop itself (placement, speed, spin, etc.) to your opponent?What is the strongest part of your game? What is your opponent's weakest? How can you connect these two? Failing that, how can you get your strength against your opponent's average, or perhaps your average against your opponent's weakness? You need to be looking for ways to force these match-ups. (See "A Levels Approach to Tactics.")If you have a good serve and loop, it's not enough to serve and loop; you have to know where to serve and loop. For example, I'm forever reminding players with good loops that they normally shouldn't just loop to the backhand, and then look for a chance to attack the middle or wide forehand, where most players are weaker defensively. Why not plan to attack the middle first? (At the higher levels, against a very good counterlooper who is waiting, you might not want to do this - but often they are hanging around their backhand side, leaving the wide forehand somewhat open. And yet, even at that level, the middle is usually the weakest spot.)Think about someone you regularly play against. What is he uncomfortable against? You might want to consider how others play against him, since it's possible you are missing his problem areas. Then figure out how you can best match up against him.But don't think of it as just one tactical solution to one player. The key is to make it ahabitto develop game plans - something you automatically think about and implement every time you play. When game plans becomes a habit you'll get your better shots into play while picking apart the weaknesses of your opponents, leading to more upsets, beating your peers, and dominating against weaker players who might have given you problems before.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1983title: November 24, 2014 - ?Pre-Serve Routine - a 1-2-3 Approachdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players serve without any type of routine. They just go to the table, decide what serve to do, and then serve. If all you want to do is get the ball in play, that's fine. But if you want to serve effectively, there's more to it. (Before we go on, here's a Tip onPracticing Serves the Productive Way, one onTen Steps to a Great Service Game, and one onPurpose of the Serve.)First, you need to mentally prepare yourself for each serve. That means going through a pre-serve routine. It can be short and simple, such as just coming to a complete stop (as required by the serving rules), where you finalize what serve you will do, and then clear your mind to prepare for the upcoming rally. Or it could be a bit more. Some bounce the ball on the table or even the floor. Others wipe their hand on the table. I like to push up the sleeve of my serving shoulder, drop my serving arm so it hangs loosely, and then swing it back and forth one time like a pendulum (which also helps loosen the arm muscles). Then I come to a complete stop, visualize the serve, and then serve it. (I decide what the serve will be before I start this routine, though I often change my mind afterwards while visualizing the serve.)Second, you need to visualize the serve. That means all aspects of it:Height of toss (here's a Tip onHeight of Service Toss)Height of contact (low!)Location of contact (here's a Tip onService Contact Point)Speed of contactContact itself (grazing for spin, flatter for speed; here's a Tip onFive Steps to a Great Spin Serve)Direction of the serve (here's a Tip onWhere to Serve Short, and here's one onTurn Opponents Into Puppets with Long Serves)Flight of the ball (curving if there is sidespin, sinking if topspin, floating if backspin)Location of first bounce (where on your side of table)Break on first bounce (if a spin serve)Where it crosses the net (always low)Location of second bounce (where on table, both direction and depth; here's a Tip onDepth Control of Serves)Height of bounce on far side (here's a Tip onServing Low)Break on second bounce (if a spin serve)Does this mean going through a checklist of all of the above? NO!!! It means visualizing all aspects of the serve, taken as a whole. You can recognize a person's face without consciously noticing what makes it different from another's. Similarly, you can visualize an entire serve without consciously noting each aspect. (Here's a Tip that covers much of this -A Journey of Nine Feet Begins at Contact.)Third, you have to be ready for the follow-up. This means getting into a proper ready stance immediately after the serve. It also means mentally being ready to follow up the serve. This has to be a flexible approach - never force something that isn't there. For example, you might decide you are looking to follow your serve with a forehand loop. If the opponent pushes and you are able to get to it, you get the shot. But if your opponent attacks the serve, drops it short, or catches you off guard with an aggressive push that you can't get your forehand on, you need to flexibly react to that shot. Similarly, a player may decide he's going to follow with a loop from either side, depending on where the ball goes - but if the opponent drops the ball short, you have to flexibly change your shot.This last aspect takes experience to get right. For example, if an opponent pushes your serve back over and over, an experienced player may decide to use the following tactic: when he serves backspin, he'll likely get a heavier, lower return, and so follow with forehand or backhand loop, depending on where the ball goes. But if he serves no-spin, he'll likely get a lighter, higher return, and so look to follow with a forehand. (I do this tactic all the time.) In theory, this makes it look like you should serve more no-spin, but there's also a higher probability that it'll be attacked, plus you need to vary the serve so the opponent can't get used to one serve, so you have to vary between backspin and no-spin. (Here's a Tip onServing No-spin.)So consider taking a 1-2-3 approach to serving: mentally prepare yourself, visualize the serve, and prepare for the follow-up.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1976title: November 17, 2014 - Smooth Acceleration + Grazing Contact = Great Spindate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The two most common mistakes players make in failing to create great spin are 1) a lack of smooth acceleration, and 2) grazing contact, which are the two pillars of creating spin, whether it be serving, pushing, chopping, or slow looping. (For faster looping, you sink the ball more into the sponge, but the smooth acceleration part holds for all looping.) I'm mostly writing for players using inverted sponge, but the same principles apply to most pips-out surfaces as well, as long as they have some grippiness.When looping, players below the advanced level often try to get extra spin by "muscling" the ball, meaning they try to use nearly 100% of their muscle power as they go for maximum racket velocity. The actual result is they only use a few of their upper-body muscles (often mostly arm), and a loss of control. When they learn to slow down and use all their muscles (at perhaps 70%) and smoothly accelerate into the ball, that's when they get the acceleration needed for powerful loops with both spin and speed. That's why the most powerful loopers often make it look effortless.When serving and pushing, beginning and intermediate players often use a short stroke and sort of jab at the ball. They are thinking that the velocity they get with this jabbing will create great spin. Actually, it just leads to a loss of control as you can't control the racket this way. Plus, for physics reasons I won't get into (partially because I'm not a physicist), you get more spin if you smoothly accelerate into the ball, with the rubber literally slinging the ball out as it accelerates through contact. (When looping with both speed and spin, where you sink the ball more into the sponge, it should feel like you're almost holding the ball on your racket as it carries it through the shot, with an even greater slingshot effect.)But on slow spin shots (serving, pushing, chopping, slow loops), you only get this tremendous spin if you graze the ball - the second problem many players have. Too often players sink the ball too much into the sponge instead of the fine grazing motion needed. To learn to graze the ball, just toss one up and graze it with your racket, making it spin. Generally do this with a pendulum serve motion, but contact the ball on theleftside of the ball (for a righty), with the racket going mostly up and slightly left, so that the ball goes straight up. Catch it and repeat. It's important to spin the ball so it goes straight up, both so you can catch it and repeat, and so you can develop ball control. (If you can't control the direction the ball goes when you graze it with this exercise, how can you do it when actually serving?)I recommend beginning players get a multi-colored ball or put markings on one so they can practice grazing and see the spin they are creating. This gives feedback on whether you are really spinning the ball or not and how much.For more advanced players, I recommend they also do the ball spinning drill I wrote about above. It's a great way to really develop those grazing skills so you can both spin the heck out of the ball and control it. Advanced players should also experiment with smooth acceleration and grazing on their spin shots, and see how much they can make the ball spin.When you can put great spin on the ball with your serve, apply the same principles to pushing and slow looping. (Also chopping if that is in your arsenal.) Don't be afraid to throw in some slow, spinny loops, even if you normally loop pretty hard. Slow, spinny loops are extremely effective at the beginning/intermediate level, but many forget or never realize how effective they are even at the advanced level if not overused. They not only are effective on their own as the opponent struggles to adjust to the slower speed and higher spin, but the contrast makes your other loops more effective.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1970title: November 10, 2014 - Keep the Ball Deepdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the most important things that distinguish top players from others is the depth of their shots. There are times when you want to keep the ball short on the table - short serves and pushes (to stop opponents from looping), short blocks (as a change of pace), and wide-angle shots (allowing you to go outside the corners for extreme angles). Counterloops often don't go deep on the table - it's hard to control depth from way off the table. However, these are the exceptions. In most cases you want most of your shots to go deep on the table - pushes, blocks, counter-hits, drives, loops, chops, fishes, and lobs. You also want your deep serves to go truly deep.By going deep you give yourself time to react to the opponent's shot. You take away the extreme angles, and so have less table to cover. Finally, balls that land in the middle of the table (depth-wise) are easier to attack. Most intermediate players can loop kill or smash them, and advanced players rip these balls with ease. By going deep you make it difficult for your opponent to hit winners or even to play aggressive.When you see advanced players returning shot after shot, usually it's not that they have incredible reflexes; it's that they are keeping the ball deep, and so can react to the opponent's shots. Weaker players usually put their shots shorter and are unable to react to their opponent's shots, and mistakenly blame it on slower reflexes. (They also place the ball well, usually to wide corners, forcing the opponent to move.)How does one go about learning depth control?First, be aware of the depth of your shots. If I catch a ball in the middle of a rally and ask my opponent where his last shot was, he'll usually know the direction but will often have no clue about the depth. Depth awareness often doesn't really come about for many players until they approach the advanced levels - and this lack of awareness often stops players from reaching those levels.Second, strive to keep the ball deep on most shots, both in games and practice. Stop playing safe, middle-of-the-table shots that are effective against weaker players but are meatballs for stronger ones. Aim for the last 18 inches or so of the table, and you'll develop the habit of keeping the ball deep - and the average level of your opponents' shots will go down dramatically. (Keep in mind that the goal isn't to hit the ball 18 inches from the end-line; it's to hit the ballwithin18 inches of the end-line. So your average shot might actually be within a foot of the end-line.)Third, practice your depth shots. Once they are past the beginning levels most players stop thinking about simple drills like forehand to forehand and backhand to backhand - but it is simple drills like these where you can learn depth control. Put a string or some other marker across the table, about 18 inches from the end-line, and see if you consistently keep the ball past it. Don't try to consciously guide the shot; learn the feel for keeping the ball deep, and let your subconscious take over, just as it should for all learned shots. Perhaps have one player block while the other attacks, and both try to keep the ball deep.You can practice this on your own with a box of balls. Bounce them on your side of the table and hit to the far side with various shots, and learn the feel for keeping the ball deep. You can practice depth on pushes, drives, and loops in this way. Perhaps put a box against the end-line on the far side and see if you can fill the box up with balls. It's not exactly the same as normally you are hitting against an incoming ball, but it's close enough to practice getting the feel for depth.You should similarly practice the depth on your long serves. If your serve isn't supposed to go short (so given the chance the second bounce would be on the table or at most barely long - a "half-long" serve), then you want the first bounce to be very deep, within 6-12 inches of the end-line. You have complete control of your serves, so you should have even greater depth control with them than with rallying shots.Keep the ball deep and your level will leap!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1959title: October 27, 2014 - Defensive or Offensive Returns of Short Servesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:While this Tip is mostly about returning short serves, it also follows for those who aren't ready or able to loop against deep serves. At higher levels most players loop deep serves, and so only have to make a decision on what to do against shorter serves. At beginning and intermediate levels, however, players often do push against deep backspin serves. If they are going to do this, they should at least know how to approach this with their receive.Many players look to push back most serves - and are caught off guard against topspin and sidespin serves, often popping them up or making a last-second change to a weak drive return. (You can chop down on these and sort of push them back, but it's often better to drive them back.) Others wait to see if the ball has backspin or not, and have to make a last-second choice between pushing (if the ball has backspin) or driving (if the ball doesn't have backspin). If the serve is no-spin, you can do either, but if you push you have to aim low.If you want to reach the higher levels, it's often better to approach receive with the idea that you are going to attack all short serves - unless you make a last-second decision to push. In other words, rather than looking to push (and messing up against topspin/sidespin) or having to make a last-second decision between two choices (and so not being really ready for either), it's better to know what you are going to do and be decisive about it - and then change your mind at the last second if you see backspin. There are three primary reasons for this.First, it's a lot easier to change your mind at the last second from attacking the serve to a simple push if you see backspin on the serve than it is to go from pushing to attacking the serve if you realize it isn't a backspin serve. It's easy to simply open your racket at the last second and push against a slow, incoming backspin ball, but it's tricky close your racket at the last second and drive against a faster incoming topspin or sidespin ball.Second, you can attack any short serve - even if it has backspin - and so if you decide in advance you are going to attack, you know you can do this. If you instead decide in advance to push the serve, you may get crossed up with a non-backspin serve. And if the ball does have backspin and you decide an attack is risky, it's easy to change your mind and switch to a push. There's nothing wrong with mostly pushing against backspin, though at higher levels you'd need to sometimes push them short or attack them.And third, it gives you decisiveness. If you aren't sure whether you are going to attack or push, that can lead to indecisiveness, which leads to mistakes.So look to be aggressive in your receives, with the option of switching to a push against backspin if you aren't confident in attacking it. You may still end up switching to a push most of the time against most backspin serves, but that's easy to do, and you'll be better at reacting to topspin/sidespin serves while learning to at least sometimes be aggressive against backspin serves. It's easier to be aggressive and switch to a push than it is to be defensive and switch to being aggressive, and it's always better to be decisive than to go in indecisively and having to make a last-second decision.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1953title: October 20, 2014 - Top Ten Ways to Play Your Best in a Tournamentdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:1) Put together a list of tips for yourself.For example, you might write down "Stay low" if you tend to stand up too straight. Or you might write, "Relax and have fun." You should refer to this list periodically during the tournament.2) Decide what your mental frame of mind should be.Some players get too hyped up for their matches, and so don't play well. Others can't get up for their matches, and also don't play well. Decide where you stand in this spectrum, and either calm yourself down or psyche yourself up before each match. Decide in advance what you need to do. You might prepare differently for each match, based on the opponent's playing style. If you anticipate that you will have to be more aggressive against one opponent, you might have to be more "psyched up" for that match. On the other hand, being hyped up might only make you miss more. You have to decide what works for you.3) Work on specific strengths and weaknesses.Everyone has specific strengths and weaknesses that many of their matches are won or lost on. Decide what these shots are, and make sure to practice them both before and during the tournament. For example, if you have trouble with a specific serve, have someone serve it to you over and over - even if you have to pay someone to do it! Similarly, if you have a big strength, such as a forehand smash, make sure to get it going BEFORE the match begins, not when you've already dug yourself a hole by missing the first five attempts.4) Decide what your actual and working goals are.For most people, the actual goal is to win. This doesn't mean you aren't there to have fun, but ultimately, most people are trying to win. However, if you go out to a match with this in mind, you might not play your best - you'll be too nervous. Instead, have an "acting goal," i.e. a goal that will maximize your chances of winning. Generally, make "playing your best" your active goal. If you play your best, your chances of winning are maximized, right? You may vary this, however; if you tend to play too passive, for example, your working goal might be to play aggressively.5) Arrange a warm-up partner and practice routine in advance.The night before the tournament, arrange who and when you will warm up with. Pick someone who you are comfortable warming up with. This is not the time to practice against someone whose games gives you trouble, or plays what seems to you a "weird" style - that's what you should have been practicing against at the club in the weeks before the tournament. On the day of the tournament, you want someone who can help you groove your shots. Once your shots are grooved and warmed up, you can then adjust to the many wacky styles you may face (as well as more standard ones). Decide in advance what drills you want to do; don't just do forehand to forehand, etc. - make sure to do footwork drills and serve & receive drills. Make sure to either play out points or play some games before you go out for your tournament match - you don't want the first real points you play to be in a tournament match.6) Bring food & beverages, and eat lightly.Good food & beverage services at tournament sites are rare. Drink water or bring your own drinks (Gatorade, for example), as well as snacks (such as fruit). Avoid eating a large meal during the tournament unless you have two hours or more free afterwards. It's best to snack regularly on easily digested food (mostly carbohydrates), or you will be somewhat tired while you digest the large meal.7) Prepare for slippery floors.One of the most common mistakes I see is not preparing for a slippery floor. Over half of tournaments are played on flooring that is not grippy enough for you to play your best. Many players don't even realize how much they are giving up until they do something about it - and their playing level shoots up. What can you do? There are several options. First, make sure you have good, grippy shoes. Some players even bring two pairs of shoes - one normal pair, and one "extra grippy' for slippery floors. Second, you should always bring a small towel or paper towels to a tournament. If the floors are slippery, dampen the towel, and put it to the side of the table. Every few points, rub your feet on them. Try this, and you'll find it makes a huge difference.8) Practice your serves.The day of the tournament, practice your serves. Tuning them up will pay off more for you, time-for-time, than just about any other practice. Yet most players don't warm up their serves before a match, and so don't have their best serves available.9) Prepare physically.Prepare your muscles for combat! Before warming up, do some easy jogging to get them warm. Do a thorough stretching routine. Finally, before each match, you might do some short but vigorous physical activity to get the muscles prepared. You might shadow practice, or do a few sprints; however, make sure not to tire yourself out so much that you can't play the match. Somewhat related to this is getting enough sleep in the last few days before the tournament. (I've read studies that have shown that it's actually more important getting enough sleep in the last few days before a sports activity than the actual night before.)10) Do some meditation and mental visualization.Let's not get mystical here. However, you will play better if you take some time before a match to clear your mind and do some mental visualization. Go somewhere quiet, and blank your mind out. Then visualize yourself doing the shots you plan on doing. A few minutes of this is worth more than an equal amount of practice time on the table.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1947title: October 13, 2014 - Working With Your Subconsciousdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The single most important thing to understand about table tennis training is thatyou are training your subconscious to automatically perform each technique properly. When you do a shot, you don't consciously move your feet into the exact proper position; decide what shot to do and where and how hard; calculate the racket angle; guide your backswing in just the right way; time exactly when to start the forward swing; and contact the ball just the right way. You may be consciouslyawareof these things going on, but they are guided by a well-trained subconscious, that part of your brain that does things automatically.A good example of this is tying your shoe. After doing it for years or decades, do you consciously guide each movement? No - your hands just fly about doing what they've done so many times that you no longer need to pay attention. You just watch and are aware of it as it is taking place. As an exercise, try tying your shoes except don't make any move until you've consciously chosen exactly what needs to be done, and do this each step of the way. See what happens?Similarly, a properly trained table tennis player doesn't consciously guide his shots; he just watches as the subconscious does what it's done so many times before. Of course it's more complicated in table tennis since the ball is moving and spinning, unlike a stationary shoe, which is why it takes a lot of training to get right.So what should your conscious mind be doing in a rally when training and playing a match? Here are five things it should be doing.First, the conscious mind guides the training process.You have to decide what type of training the subconscious needs, and then train those skills. It should be analyzing what's going on and figuring out what changes are needed and what type of training needs to be done. But it should only be doing this between points.Second, the conscious mind should be watching what happens.The subconscious can't see what's going on unless you are watching as well. So focus on what's going on. This primarily means watching the ball, but it also means watching the opponent to see what he does. The key is that you only watch, and let the trained subconscious react. This is the primary - and perhaps only - purpose of the conscious mind during a point. (You should also be listening to the sound of the ball as it hits the rackets and table, which helps with timing and reading the shot.)Third, the conscious mind should remember the feel of a properly hit shot.(This might be the most important and least applied.) If you know the feel of a good smash or loop, you can essentially ask your subconscious to repeat that feel - and it'll usually oblige, assuming you've trained it well. When you miss a shot or the technique is wrong, the feel should be wrong, and you should focus on remembering what that proper feel should be - and your subconscious will get the message, and try to repeat it. Never focus on the shots that miss or that are wrong or your subconscious will begin to emulate those. (The only exception is if you absolutely cannot get it right, and have to consciously analyze what you are doing wrong - but there the goal is to get it right, and then focus on what is right, i.e. that right "feel.")Fourth, the conscious mind chooses the basic tactics in a game situation.This should happen between points, never during a rally. This is easy when simply choosing what serve to do. It gets trickier when choosing tactics based on possible situations. For example, if you decide to attack the opponent's wide forehand, you have to wait for the right opportunity to do so. If you decide you need to attack the opponent's forehand, your subconscious will get the message, and when it sees a chance to attack, it'll attack the wide forehand. (Some believe they consciously make these decisions in a rally, but often it is the subconsciously doing what the conscious mind has asked it to do, with the conscious mind simply being aware of it as it happens.) If you regularly think about tactics between points, the subconsciously will get the message and will soon reflexively do these tactics at the proper times. At the advanced levels most tactics are reflexive. When a top player suddenly, say, tactically drops the ball short, he didn't consciously decide to do so; his trained subconscious saw the tactical opportunity and did so.Five, the conscious minds needs to simply let go, both emotionally and in shot execution.An emotional mind will tend to interfere with shots, which is why professional athletes often look so bland just before and during rallies. A conscious mind that tries to take control will only interfere with the trained subconscious. So during a rally clear the mind and let go, and let the subconscious do what it's been trained to do.So learn to work with your subconscious. Train it and let it go. In the end, it'll learn to execute, while you, the conscious part that's in charge, mostly just watches during actual play. You should almost feel guilty about this - you just stand around watching while the subconscious pulls off the shots, and guess who gets the credit?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1943title: October 6, 2014 - Should You Play Tournaments When Working on Something New?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:To improve you need both good technique and match experience. You can get match experience at a club, but you get a lot more in tournaments, where you play new players and find out where your game really stands - feedback that helps you pinpoint what you need to work on. The question is what to do when you are working on new techniques. If you play tournaments - or matches, for that matter - you'll likely fall back into your old habits, and re-enforce them. So sometimes it's better to skip tournaments and matches for a time while you work on the new techniques.But how long should you skip them? There's an easy measure. When you are changing techniques, it's best not to play matches - practice or tournaments - until you've mastered the new technique to the point where you'll reflexively use it in matches. This doesn't mean you should skip playing matches until the technique is perfect and you never get it wrong, but it means waiting until you can do it in a match situation most of the time. Otherwise you'll just be re-enforcing bad habits.By playing matches when the technique is almost perfected, but not quite, you'll re-enforce your ability to do it under pressure - and that's half the problem with developing a new technique. In fact, the best measure of whether you have learned the new technique is to see if you use it not only under match pressure, but under the intense pressure of a close match. If you can do it at deuce, you can do it anytime.A famous example of skipping tournaments and matches in general was Hungary's Istvan Jonyer. He made the Hungarian National Team in the early 1970s mostly by blocking. While on the team he developed his powerful forehand loop and became Hungarian National Champion. But he had a weak backhand, and couldn't really compete with the best players in the world. Then he spent six months up in a mountain training, where he did essentially nothing but backhand loop. He didn't play matches as he worked on this. When he finished, he had a great backhand loop - though other aspects of his game had deteriorated, and he had to practice them to get them back. About two years later he became the 1975 Men's World Champion, and was #1 in the world for two year and a dominant top ten (usually top five) player for over a decade.So take a look at your game, and decide what techniques you need to fix. Then decide if it's worth spending a lot of time fixing it while skipping matches. In the short run it can be frustrating, as you are just dying to play matches. In the long run it'll pay off.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1937title: September 29, 2014 - Improvised Gamesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players improve by using practice drills that mimic something they need to improve on in matches. But why not turn that around, and play matches that mimic something you need to improve on in matches? It's not redundant - it's a matter of playing Improvised Games instead of regular ones.For example, play a game or match where you always serve short backspin to the opponent's backhand, he pushes deep to your backhand, you backhand loop, and then you play out the point. Keep score like a regular game, and do your best to win in the improvised rules.Here are ten Improvised Games you might try out. But don't restrict yourself to these. Look at your own game, figure out what you need to work on, and design Improvised Games that allow you to work on those techniques. (POP = Play Out Point.)Serve short backspin to opponent's backhand; he pushes to your backhand; you backhand loop; POP. Alternate versions: Your first backhand loop goes to a specified location, then POP. Or take it one step further, and opponent's first block goes to a specified location. For example, you backhand loop to his backhand, he blocks to your forehand, and then POP. You can also vary the short serve with no-spin serves.Same as #1, except opponent pushes serve to your forehand, and you loop the forehand, and then POP. Or use alternate versions, as explained in #1. You can also have opponent push to your backhand and you forehand loop, if you have good footwork.Serve short side-top to forehand or backhand. Opponent flips either anywhere, or to pre-arranged spot. You attack, POP.Serve varied long serves to opponent's backhand. Opponent soft loops serve back. You attack, POP.Put a box or towel near the middle of the table, cutting of perhaps half the table. Play a backhand-to-backhand game where the server starts the rally be serving topspin. Or do a variation where it's forehand to forehand, or forehand to backhand. Or variations where one player loops, the other blocks. The goal here isn't just to win the point, but to play great rallies that'll carry over into real matches.Need to work on your pushing? Play a pushing game where both players can only push, with rallies starting with a backspin serve. But since most players push better on the backhand, there might be a tendency to push to the forehand in this game, since the opponent isn't allowed to attack. So set a rule where you can never push twice in a row to the forehand. Or set a rule where players can attack, but if they do they have to win the point on one shot.To work on serve and attack, play a game where the server has only two shots to win the point, not including the serve. Or, as long as you don't get into the habit of trying to rip every ball, only one shot after the serve.For very fast forehand-oriented players, play a game where you can only play forehand shots. Or perhaps you can only play one backhand in a row. (This is one of my favorites, but it's gotten harder as I've gotten older.)To work on short pushes, play a game where each player serves short backspin and then both players continue the rally pushing every ball short (i.e. given the chance the ball would bounce twice). If either player thinks the ball is going long he lets it go, and if it goes long he wins the point; if it bounces twice he loses the point. An alternate version is where players can attack, but if they do they must win the point on one shot.Play a lobbing, fishing, or chopping game to work on your defense, where you aren't allowed to attack. Alternate version is where you can attack, but must win the point on one shot if you do.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1927title: September 22 - Power in Table Tennisdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Power in Table TennisSome players can blast the ball a zillion miles per hour with hyperbolic spin while seemingly barely trying, while others grunt and grimace and can't break a soap bubble. So where does power in table tennis come from? Power comes primarily from eight factors. They are:Equipment. Offensive rackets and sponges add to whatever power you put on the ball.Strength. It makes a difference, though not as much as some would seem.Muscle Elasticity. This is probably more important than sheer strength. It's a primary reason why older players, even if they weight train, lose power as their muscles lose their elasticity. Elastic muscles are like slingshots.Body Mass and Type. If you rotate your body into the shot, you put your mass into the shot, and more mass means more power. You also might get more power potential from longer arms, the type of muscle (fast-twitch vs. slow-twitch), and even the way the muscles are connected.Type of Contact. If you graze the ball too finely you lose the power potential from the sponge as well as speed. If you sink it directly into the sponge you gain speed from hitting directly into the wood, but lose power that might be generated by the sponge if you contact at more of an angle.Proper Technique. This maximizes power generation as well as your ability to control it.Timing of Muscle Contractions. Each muscle gets the next one started, and if it's not timed properly, you lose power.Timing of Contact. If contact is not done at the point of maximum power, you lose power.Let's elaborate on the last two - the timing issues. There are two types of timing when stroking the ball, and both lead to power. (Proper technique technically would include the two timing issues below, but I'm separating them here - but without good technique your power potential is severely limited.)Timing of Muscle Contractions. Each muscle gets the next one started. The proper order for a forehand stroke is legs, hips, waist, shoulder rotation, shoulder, elbow, and wrist. (Wrist is optional on some shots.)If one contracts a muscle too soon or too late you lose power. If you contract any muscle too hard it becomes nearly impossible to control or to time them all together, so you only contract at whatever percent you can consistently and smoothly control - perhaps 70%, perhaps more on easy high balls.Timing of Contact. Contact should take place when the racket approaches maximum speed. Technically, you shouldn't contact the ball when the racket is at maximum speed; you want to accelerate through contact, meaning the racket actually speeds up as you contact the ball, and so isslightlyfaster the split second after contact. (This might be where physicists can chime in, but from a coaching point of view, this is a key issue - far too many players lose power because they stop accelerating before contact, thereby dissipating some of their power. Or is this an illusion, and you get maximum power by reaching maximum velocity right at contact, meaning zero acceleration at that point?)So how can you increase your power? All of the items above are factors, though I don't recommend gaining weight (other than muscle mass) to increase power. (I'm not sure how much of a factor that really is, but it's greatly offset by the loss of mobility.) Physical training can help with strength and muscle elasticity. But most of power potential comes from items 5-8 above. A coach can greatly help you with these. When I watch players who have trouble generating power - which is most players - I find that the the most common problems are those that a coach can solve - the technique and timing issues. Grunting and grimacing are just indications that the player is having technique and timing problems that keep him from getting that easy power that comes so easily to some players. (See my related Tip on this,Easy Power.)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1922title: September 15, 2014 - Should You Watch the Ball All the Way Into the Racket?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:This is a common question. It really depends on the incoming shot. There's a general rule - if the ball is moving toward you slowly, watch it all the way into the racket. If it's moving toward you fast, you only need watch it to the point where you can no longer react to it.Against slow balls, you should see contact. This includes serving, pushing, flipping a short ball, blocking against a slow loop, or smashing or looping against a push or other softly hit ball. (Of course, on some backhand shots actual contact is hidden by the racket.) It's also more important to see contact on more finely hit balls where you spin the ball by grazing it. You don't need to see contact as much on flatter shots, such as smashes, counter-hits, or blocks.If the ball is coming at you fast, there's no point in watching it all the way into the racket since you can't react to it at the end anyway. So you only need to watch it until it is perhaps a few feet in front of you, depending on the speed of the ball. Against a medium-fast ball, you might watch it almost until contact.Some players do appear to watch the ball all the way into the racket. This is probably just habit - rather than stop moving their head as they follow the ball toward their racket they simply get in the habit of following the ball all the way to contact. That's fine for some, and perhaps it helps with their timing. But there's no real need to watch the ball right until contact except against a slow-moving ball. One advantage of not watching the ball until contact is that you can look up more quickly and see what your opponent is doing, and so begin to prepare for your next shot more quickly. Some players even fool their opponent by sometimes looking up early in their stroke toward one spot on the table and then hitting it to another.Here's apicture of Jan-Ove Waldner(considered by many the greatest player of all time) hitting a forehand where at contact he's already looking toward his opponent or where his ball is going.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1913title: September 8, 2014 - Easy Powerdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:What is "easy power"? It is the ability, through proper technique, to generate great force in your shots, whether it's looping or smashing. Given a high ball and enough time, most players beyond the beginning stage can hit the ball pretty hard. But often they strain to do so, which costs them both power and consistency. Players with good technique can do the same without straining, and end up with more power and consistency. Most of us have seen such players, who seem able to generate point-ending power (both speed and spin) with ease while others strain to do so. What is their secret?It's all about timing and using the whole body. Most players, when hitting or looping hard, strain to add power, and the result is they get nearly 100% force from only a few muscles, from the upper body and arms. They are losing the power from the lower body, from the legs and waist. (Some may use waist, but without the legs you can't really use the waist muscles effectively.)Watch videos of top players as they rip forehands, and see how they almost rock into the ball as they rotate into the ball, smoothly putting their entire body into the shot. They aren't even using 100% power from any of these muscles, because to do so would mean to basically jerk one muscle at full power, and so you only get power from that one muscle - and you can't really control a muscle that contracts at 100%. Instead, use all the muscles, but at perhaps 70%. This allows you to use them all in smooth progression, from legs to arm. When you can do this, you too will have "easy power" - and both your power and consistency will shoot up.Here are two videos of Wang Liqin (three-time world men's singles champion) that illustrate this. He is considered by many to have had the best forehand loop of all time.Here's videoof him looping in a drill (45 sec, including slow motion), where you can see how he rotates all of his body into the shot, starting with the legs and moving up to the arm.Here's videoof him (9sec, also slow motion replay) ripping a winner.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1908title: September 1, 2014 - How to Execute a Fast Servedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:These are rarely front-line serves as even intermediate players have little trouble attacking them if you use them too often. However, they are a great variation to spin serves, and if used a few times each game will often catch the opponent off guard. With experience, you'll get a feel for when and where to throw one of these fastballs at an opponent.The keys to an effective fast serve are:SpeedDepthPlacementSpin (or lack of)ConsistencySurpriseLet's look at how to execute the serve while doing all six.Speed. This is the whole point. The problem is most players don't understand how to maximize this, or chicken out under pressure. To serve fast, you must:Serve aggressively. You can't serve fast by patting the ball over the net.First bounce near your own end-line. You want to maximize the amount of table between bounces so the ball has a chance to drop. To do this you need to contact the ball far enough behind the end-line to allow this.Low contact point. Otherwise the ball will bounce higher and will take longer to drop and hit the other side, and so you won't be able to serve as fast.Depth. You want to serve as deep on the table as possible in order to jam the opponent. Just as important is that if the fast serve isn't going deep on the table then you aren't maximizing the speed. A fast serve should, by its very nature, go very deep or you aren't serving it very fast. There's a simple way to increase the depth of the serve - serve faster!Placement. All fast serves should go to one of three spots: wide forehand, wide backhand, or to the middle (the opponent's switchover point between forehand and backhand, usually the playing elbow). Fast serves that go to the middle forehand or middle backhand are just feeding the opponent. Make him move to the corners or make a decision and move to cover the middle. To practice this, put targets on the far side of the table and see if you can consistently hit them.Spin. To maximize speed, put some topspin on the ball to pull it down. However, sometimes you want to vary this by serving with sidespin or a fast, dead (flat) serve, often at the middle. You can create topspin or sidespin by essentially slapping the ball with an upward (for topspin) or sideways (for sidespin) motion. You don't want to graze the ball too much with a fast serve as you won't get enough speed that way - that's how you create a spin serve. To serve a fast, dead serve, you need to contact the ball with a very slight downward motion, putting a very light backspin on the ball, sort of a downwards slap at contact, just as with topspin or sidespin. After two bounces on the table the ball will be dead.Consistency. It's pointless having a fast serve if you often miss it. You need to get a feel for both the proper contact with the ball and where to contact it (both the height and how far behind your end-line), and practice it until it's second nature. Then make sure to practice the serve before tournaments and big matches so you can execute the serve under pressure. As noted above under Placement, one way of practicing the serve is to put targets near the opponent's end-line and see if you can consistently hit them. You might also put a target on your own end-line and see if you hit that when you serve, to make sure that your first bounce is near your own end-line. Also, while some develop the serve by gradually building up the speed that they can serve fast, you might consider the opposite - serve as fast as you can, and gradually slow it down to the point where you can get it to hit the table. Then work at controlling that pace.Surprise. Your fast serve loses most of its effectiveness if the opponent sees it coming too soon. So set up as if you were serving your normal serves. Learn to do the fast serve from the same stance and starting with the same motion. The only difference might be that for a fast serve you might have to toss the ball back a little further so as to give yourself room to hit the ball so the first bounce is near your end-line, but if you do, that should be minimized. But your backswing should look the same whether you are serving fast or not. You don't want to telegraph to the opponent that the fast serve is coming.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1901title: August 25, 2014 - Semi-Circular Motion on Servesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the most basic and yet misunderstood techniques at the intermediate level is the semi-circular motion used in serves for variation and deception. For beginners and beginning-intermediate players, the key is getting lots of spin, such as backspin, backspin-sidespin, sidespin, sidespin-topspin, and topspin.While learning to do these spins there's little attempt to disguise the spin - the racket moves in one direction, the direction of the spin. But once you can do that it's time to learn to use semi-circular spin to disguise the spin. For example, for a forehand pendulum serve (with racket tip pointing down), you would start with the racket moving down, then down and sideways, then sideways, then sideways and up, and then up, like a pendulum. If I were to show you this motion and ask what spin it is, it's a trick question as you can't answer without knowing where in the serving motion contact was made.Here's a video(7:24) showing this type of semi-circular motion serve by top players in slow motion. Note that it's almost impossible to really study a top player's serve except in slow motion - at full speed everything happens too fast to see what they are really doing. In the videos one thing to look for is the amount of motion the racket does in directions different from the direction it goes at contact. Often the actual contact happens so quickly that even in slow motion it's difficult to pick up as the racket is rapidly changing direction at that point to confuse the opponent. The direction the racket is moving at contact is usually only for a split second, while the rest of the service motion exaggerates the racket moving in other directions. (Also note how after contact the racket often goes off in a different direction, sometimes away from the semi-circular motion, as an additional attempt to disguise the spin and confuse the opponent.)At the higher levels, at full speed, the serves often don't look like semi-circular motions because the motion is done so quickly with a much shorter motion. But in slow motion you can see the racket go through this circular motion. It's not always a complete semicircle as parts of the motion are shortened for disguise.This one of the three important ways of disguising the spin on your serve. The other two are sheer amount of spin (making it hard to precisely read it), and spin/no-spin combinations (see my articleThose Dizzying No-Spin Serves).===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1895title: August 18, 2014 - The Purpose of the Servedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The serve is one of the most misunderstood techniques in table tennis. Many players serve just to get the ball in play, or to keep the opponent from attacking, or to try to score winners with every serve. So what is the purpose of the serve?The primary purpose of the serve is to set up your attack. Unless the receiver does something to stop your attack, you should serve and attack essentially every time you serve. This doesn't mean your first attack has to be a winner, but it should be aggressive.In the modern game, attacking usually means looping, either forehand or backhand. Most favor the usually more powerful forehand, but others loop from either side, depending on where the receive is, and some may favor the backhand loop. Others use the serve to set up their smash, either with a serve and smash, or a serve to set up a loop, and the loop to set up the smash. (This is rare at the higher levels, where looping completely dominates, but is still common at the intermediate level.)This doesn't mean you don't sometimes serve for winners. In fact, players who do not have any "trick" serves that are designed to trick an opponent into an easy miss are lacking in their service game. (Trick serves usually only work a few times, however.) Most serves should be to set up the attack. Even if the serve is a trick serve where you hope the opponent will miss the serve outright, you should assume it's coming back, and be ready for the follow-up, which should be an attack unless the opponent does something to stop it. If anything, you should be so expecting your "trick" serves to come back that when an opponent misses it, you are surprised as you were so waiting to follow up with an attack.Even defensive players should use the serve to set up an attack, even if it's an occasional one. For example, the defensive player may serve and look for a specific return (or just a generally weak one), and if he gets it, attack. If he doesn't, then he may go back on defense.Some players may use the serve to set up their best rallying shot. For example, a blocker might serve long, and then quick-block the next ball. Or a counter-hitter might serve short topspin, which brings the receiver in over the table while starting a topspin rally, and then the server can get right into aggressive counter-hitting, with the receiver perhaps jammed to the table and so unable to start the rally off well.Once you get into the mindset that the purpose of the serve is to set up your attack, then you can begin to gain experience on which serves set up which returns, and how and where to best to attack them. Once you have this serve and attack mind-set, you'll soon be dominating the points on your serve. We'll finish with an acronym that I just made up and that's a bit dated for the pre-looping years (when hitting dominated), but always remember to "Serve andMakeA StrongHit" - SMASH!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1889title: August 11, 2014 - Ten Steps to a Great Service Gamedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:I've included links to some pertinent articles.Learn to serve with lots of spin by accelerating the racket through the ball and grazing it.(Here's the articleServing Short with Spin. Here's another,Five Steps to a Great Spin Serve.)Learn to serve various spins, including backspin, side-backspin, sidespin, side-topspin, and topspin, and be able to serve with sidespin in either direction.(Here's the articleImportance of Serve Variety.)Learn to serve low.(Here's the articleServing Low.)Learn to control the depth and direction of the serve.(Here's the articleDepth Control of Serves.)Learn to serve with spin using a semi-circular motion so you can create different spins with the same motion by varying where in the motion you contact the ball.(Here's the articleSemi-Circular Motion on Serves.)Learn to minimize and do quickly this semi-circular motion so receiver has trouble picking up contact.(See same article linked in #5.)Learn to change the direction of your follow-through with your racket the split second after contact to mislead the receiver.(Here's the articleExaggerate the Opposite Motion on Serves.)Learn to fake spin and serve no-spin by contacting the ball near the handle.(Here's the articleThose Dizzying No-Spin Serves.)Learn to serve fast & deep as a variation to your spin serves.(Here's the articleFifteen Important Deep Serves.Here's another,Turn Opponents into Puppets with Long Serves. Here'sHow to Ace an Opponent.)Learn to follow up your serves.(Here's the articleThe Purpose of the Serve.)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1884title: August 4, 2014 - How to Move Up a Leveldate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:What does it mean to move up a level in table tennis? I'd define two players to be on different levels if it would be a major upset if one defeated the other. Another way of looking at it would be to say that if the stronger player plays his normal level, he would win pretty much every time. Based on this, I'd say a level in table tennis ranges from about 300 points at the lower levels (under 1000 or so), to about 100 points at the higher levels (over 2500 or so). For most USATT members, a level would be about 200 rating points or so.How can you move up a level in table tennis? It means improving all parts of your game, as one weak link in your game is like a weak link in a chain.You could work hard, dramatically improve one aspect of your game, and hope to move up a level. But it's not that simple. Suppose you develop a really nice forehand loop. With this weapon, you would think that your level would go up dramatically. And sure enough, you will do better against players around your own level. But when you play players a level higher, their level is far enough ahead of yours that they'll simply do something to disarm your new weapon. They may serve short, push short, push very heavy, throw spinny or fast serves at you, use ball placement, block well, force backhand exchanges, play quick shots so you don't have time to loop, or simply attack first. In each case, they'll take your weapon away from you, and you still won't move up that coveted level. Often, a stronger player will seem to win on one of his strengths, when in fact he is winning by exploiting a weakness of yours that allows him to use his strength.The lesson is that to move up a level, you need to improve your overall game, not just one aspect. A player who is a level stronger than you rarely defeats you on one aspect of his game (although many erroneously believe this to be true); he does so by improving the overall level of his game. (There are, of course, players who have improved all but one aspect of their game, and by improving that one final aspect, suddenly go up the coveted level!) A strength in your game can compensate for a weakness, but only to a certain extent.So how do you go about improving the overall level of your game? To move up a level in table tennis, you have be able to match the players a level higher than you on five key things:You have to return your opponents' serves as well as they return your serves.You have to either rally as fast as your opponents can rally, or force your opponents to rally at your pace (by slowing the pace down with pushes, slow loops, controlled drives, etc.).Rallying at their pace means either hitting at their pace, or simply reacting to their pace (i.e. blocking or chopping). "Pace" means both speed and quickness.You have to be able to react to your opponents' rallying spins (loops, pushes, chops, lobs, spins returned by long pips, etc.) as well as they react to yours.You have to be able to end the point (i.e. smashing, loop kills) as well as your opponents do.This means either being able to end the point as well as your opponents, or being able to stop them from ending the point better than you can by not giving them shots where they can end the point. Ending the point does not always mean ending it with one shot - it can also mean a series of strong shots that win the point.And finally, you have to have at least one strength that threatens your opponents as much as their strengths threaten you, and a way of getting your strength(s) into play.You may have noted that tactics is not one of the five "keys." This is because tactics is part of all five keys. Stronger/weaker tactics simply make you stronger/weaker in each key.Do some (but not all) of the above five keys, and your performance in a tournament will go up some, perhaps half a level, but not a full level. Developing a single "overpowering" strength won't raise your level as much as you'd think, as opponents a level higher will beat you on the less developed parts of your game. Even players at your "previous" level will still often beat you by exploiting these weaknesses. But ... if you improve all five things, even just a little bit, you'll go up dramatically.What's stronger, a chain with four powerful links and one weak one, or a chain with five pretty strong ones?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1877title: July 21, 2014 - Overplaying and Underplayingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Two of the most common reasons players don't play their best are overplaying and underplaying. Overplaying is when a player goes for shots that are beyond his level, such as trying to rip winners over and over rather than use more consistent opening attacks to set up easier winners (as well as winning a surprising number of points outright as opponents miss against your steady opening attack). Underplaying is the opposite - when a player plays too safe. Both of these often take place when a player is nervous. Under pressure, many players do one or the other, either getting wildly aggressive or too safe. The key is to find the right balance.The way to develop a high-level attack isn't to rip every ball; it's to attack at the level you are consistent, and keep working to increase that level until you have a high-level attack. Way too many players want to rip that first ball when, if they'd take just a little off the shot, they'd be far more consistent and on the path to improvement. Top players may rip the ball harder on the first shot, but that's because they are farther along that road to improvement - they've put in the hours of developing that shot. So should you. So focus on making strong first attacks, and perhaps rip thenextball. A good general rule is this - until you have an easy pop-up, never attack at more than 80% speed.The reverse are the players who have developed strong attacks, but are afraid to use them. If that's you, then the key is to simply learn to use those attack shots you've worked so hard to develop. If you can't do it in a tournament, perhaps work your way up to that. First use them in practice or league matches, especially against weaker players. Then against players your own level. When you can do that, then start using them in tournaments. If you have difficulty doing that, then the answer might be to play a series of tournaments in a row. That way you'll get used to playing tournament matches. You might only have to do this one time, i.e. find a series of weekends where you can play tournament after tournament, until you get used to it, and using the shots you do in practice becomes more natural to do in tournaments. Once you can do this one time, it's a habit you should be able to keep for a lifetime, at least as long as you practice enough to keep the shots in practice.So a key to table tennis is that you not only have to develop your shots, you have to use them at the proper level, without over- or under-playing them, and keep developing your game so that this middle area gets better and better.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1870title: July 14, 2014 - The 7 Habits of Highly Effective Table Tennis Playersdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:There's a best-selling book called "The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People. The book lists these as the "7 Habits": 1) Be proactive; 2) Begin with the End in Mind; 3) Put First Things First; 4) Think Win/Win; 5) Seek First to Understand, Then to Be Understood; 6) Synergize; and 7) Sharpen the Saw. (There's also a best-selling sort of sequel from the same author, "The 7 Habits of Highly Effective Teens.")These books have had a major impact on many people's lives. And there's a correlation between some of these and the habits of "highly effective table tennis players." For example, you don't get to be a top player without being proactive, i.e. striving to do what it takes to improve. However, I'm not going to try to create a one-to-one correlation between the seven habits listed and ones used by top table tennis players. Instead, I'm going to list my own list of seven habits of "highly effective table tennis players." Follow these 7 habits, and see how it improves your game. Here's my list:Loves to practice.It's not enough to just put in the motions. You have towantto improve, and want to so badly that you love practicing as it allows you to do what you want to do. Going through the motions with your mind blankly just going along is a waste of time. If you love to practice, you'll improve far faster than one who is just doing the motions.Proactive in finding ways to improve, strategically and tactically.Strategic thinking is about developing your game for the future. Tactical thinking is about developing the habit of winning with what you have. You need to learn both, and you need to take the initiative in doing so. Don't leave this to your opponents, who will happily figure it out for you while beating you in competition. But when they do beat you, that's the feedback you need to analyze so you can find ways to improve.Is working toward specific goals, both short-, intermediate-, and long-term.Mindless practice is just that - mindless. Decide what you need to work on, and focus on that like a laser.A perfectionist in most or all aspects of the game.If you strive for perfection, you'll come a lot closer than one who strives for something less.Never gives up, whether in tournaments or practice.Fighters do a lot better than those who don't have a burning desire to win every point.Loves to compete and win.If winning isn't fun, then why are you practicing? Sure, you could be practicing just for the sake of having better shots or for exercise, but this isn't about the "seven habits of highly effective exercisers or having better shots without trying to become a better player."Respects opponent's game while looking to dominate it.If you don't respect an opponent's game, it's hard to try your best against it.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1863title: July 7, 2014 - Playing Bad - It's All Mental (Usually)date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:(Note - this was originally a blog entry, but I decided this expanded version was worthy of a Tip of the Week.)When players play poorly, relative to their normal level of play, they usually attribute it by just saying they played poorly. That's circular reasoning - they played poorly because they played poorly? Actually, there's always a reason when you play poorly. And the reason isalmostalwaysmental.I cannot emphasize this enough. Unless something is physical wrong with you or your equipment, or you are seriously out of practice, playing bad isalwaysmental. Period. It's a simple concept that many don't get.Is there something physically wrong with you? Don't say you are old or out of shape; these are constants that limit your playing level, but they don't make you play bad, relative to your normal level, since dealing with these factors is part of your normal level. No, something is physically wrong with you only if it's something that's not normal. Other common chronic problems that might lower your level include knee problems, back problems, sore arm, etc. But again, these do not make you play poorly; they simply lower your overall level of play. Maybe you were just tired? Well, that's a reason to play poorly; get more rest!Is there something wrong with your equipment? This can happen, but it's rare. Usually it's your own fault. Is your rubber surface dirty and so not grabby as usual? Clean it. Is it getting old and so is losing its bounce? Get new sponge. (If you can't afford new sponge, then it's a chronic problem.) Is it humid? Keep a towel just for your racket and ball so you can keep them dry. I'll also include here other factors in the equipment category. I'm used to playing in near perfect conditions, and so when I play on slippery floors, on brown wood floors with orange balls (where the floor and ball are similarly colored so I lose the ball in the background), or in bad lighting, I play poorly. Is this an equipment problem or a chronic problem? This might classify as both. The fact that I don't play well in poor conditions is a chronic problem that lowers my overall level of play, but only in certain circumstances.Are you out of practice? Whose fault is that? Solution: Go practice. If you don't have time to practice, then it's a chronic problem that simply lowers your overall level of play.So if nothing is affecting your play physically, and you can't blame it on your equipment, and you are in practice, what can you blame your poor play on? Yes, it's all mental. There are so many ways a player can talk himself out of playing well. The most common is by harping on the poor shots instead of the good ones. Harp on the good ones, and you'll likely begin to emulate them. Harp on the bad ones, and that's what you'll continue to do since that's what you're thinking about, and the brain (i.e. the subconscious) tends to mimic what it is thinking about. Or perhaps you got nervous? Yep, that's all in your head. Or you got defensive when you had a lead? Another mental problem. Or you just weren't up to playing? Yep, that's mental.I could go on and on, but the conclusion over and over is the same. When you play poorly, it's almost always mental. And guess what? With practice, you can get control over the mental aspect. You have to choose to do so, but once you do, you'll rarely have a bad day again.Here are some resources on sports psychology.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1860title: June 30, 2014 - Forehand or Backhand Serve & Attackdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you want to reach a high level in table tennis, it's pretty much a given that you need to serve and attack. There are many ways of doing this; it's just a matter of finding ways that match your game. At the higher levels, it's almost all serve and loop, though others serve and hit. You can serve backspin and loop against the likely pushed return, or you can serve topspin and loop or hit the likely countered or topspinned returned.Should you try to serve and attack with your forehand? Or should you attack with your backhand? That's a question every aspiring player needs to address. And the answer is yes and no.In general, the forehand attack is more powerful. Therefore, when possible, most players should look to follow their serves up with their forehand. Players who are very fast on their feet and with very good forehands might even force it, running around their backhands to play forehands nearly every time the serve is returned there (at least if it's deep enough to loop). Players who aren't as fast should still look for chances to follow up with the forehand, especially off weak returns off the serve that can be put away.But even if you can follow the serve up with a forehand, should you do so every time? Probably not. A forehand from the backhand side puts you out of position, and so allows your opponent to block or counter-attack to your wide forehand. You may be fast enough to get to that ball, but it's going to wear you down, and even if you make the shot, it leaves you open on the backhand side. Plus, to cover that wide forehand, you probably have to more immediately after the first forehand, meaning you'll likely be open on your backhand side if the opponent returns the first ball there. The more you attack from the backhand side with your forehand, the more your opponent can get into a rhythm off your attacks, and so he'll get more and more consistent at it.So rather than become predictable and allowing your opponent to get into a rhythm, mix in some serve and backhand attacks. If your opponent pushes long to your backhand, backhand loop. If you serve topspin and he counters or topspins to your backhand, drive or loop with the backhand. Don't let him get into that rhythm where he knows what you are going to do before you do it. Make him adjust to both forehand and backhand attacks - the shots come out differently, and can cause havoc if you mix them up.There are advantages to backhand attacks. Besides staying in position, you are facing the opponent as you hit or loop the shot, so you can see what he's doing and where he's positioned right up until the instant you are committed to your own shot. This allows you to more accurately go after his middle (transition between backhand and forehand, usually around the playing elbow), or to switch to a wide angle if you see him out of position. Also, backhand attacks are often quicker and with a shorter stroke, and so will cause timing problems for the opponent, especially if you go back and forth between forehand and backhand attacks. Even the spins are different; most players get more topspin from one side or the other. (A surprising number of players get more spin on their backhand loops than their forehand, causing a lot of balls to be blocked off the end.)Another consideration is your own serve. If you serve heavy backspin, you are likely to get a heavy push return to the backhand. There's often no huge advantage to looping this with the forehand, so you might as well backhand loop. On the other hand, if you serve with more sidespin or no-spin, and your opponent still pushes it, it's likely to have less backspin and likely pop up a bit. So for those serves you might want to favor the forehand so you can more easily put the ball away.So develop both a serve and forehand attack and serve and backhand attack. Two guns are better than one.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1854title: June 23, 2014 - Get the Backswing Rightdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:I've written about the importance ofGrip and Stance, and how getting these wrong is the root problem with most bad technique. If you have a good grip and stance, then all you really need to do is focus on a good backswing. If you have these three right, then like a bow and arrow that's been pulled back, the most natural forward swing is going to be good technique. (For this article, we're focusing on topspin shots, but the same principles apply to backspin shots.)So how do you make sure you have a proper backswing? Ideally, work with a coach. But you can analyze yours, piece by piece. First, is it too short or too long? You generally want the same backswing each time. By doing this you get a repeating stroke that feels natural to the point where any swing that's too long or too short will feel wrong - a helpful self-correcting tool. If the swing is too long, it'll take too long (and so can't use it in a fast rally) and be too cumbersome (and so hard to control). If it's too short you won't have time to generate force, and so your stroke will either have little power or be too jerky to control.Second, do you backswing to the right height? For flatter shots, backswing mostly back and slightly below the ball. For more topspinny shots, backswing lower. A backswing to the wrong height leads to all sorts of problems as you subconsciously try to adjust.Third, do you backswing with the right racket angle? You don't want major changes in your racket angle once you start your forward stroke, so you need to get the angle right at the back of your backswing. For flatter shots, the racket should be mostly straight up and down, perhaps slightly closed. (Against backspin it might be slightly open.) For topspinny shots, the racket needs to be more closed. (Against backspin, it's more straight up and down, though when looping with power you should close your racket some even against backspin.) Many players backswing with the racket too open, and adjust by closing the racket during the forward swing, leading to a loss of control.Once you have these three components of your backswing set, you can just let the shot go like an arrow. Your body's the bow, your arm is the string, and the ball is the arrow that's going to hit a bulls-eye to wherever you aimed it.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1847title: June 16, 2014 - Be a Perfectionistdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you want to be very good at table tennis or anything else, it's best to be a perfectionist. But to be a perfectionist, you have to think like a perfectionist.First, focus on getting it right. In the long run, proper execution is more important than any current result, and proper execution will lead to the best results. So focus on the techniques that are "perfect," and work to replicate them over and over until you can do them in your sleep, as well as at deuce in the fifth.Second, forget about the incorrect shots as those are the shots you want out of your head. Thinking about them only ingrains them more. Instead, develop a determination to do thenextshot "perfectly." If you keep doing the shot incorrectly, then you might have to analyze it to figure out what you need to do, but as soon as you get it right, put the incorrect ones out of your head and focus on doing it correctly.Third, don't try to memorize the specifics of a "perfect" shot. Instead, once you get it right, remember the feel of the shot. Once you have that feel down, it'll feel wrong anytime you do any part of the stroke incorrectly. Getting the feel right will ingrain the shot not just for now, but for a lifetime.If you really want to get it right, I strongly urge you to find a coach and have them work with you until you get it right, and have the feel of a "perfect" shot. Once you have that, you can practice the shot on your own without worrying about whether you are doing it right.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1841title: June 9, 2014 - Controlling a Matchdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Controlling a match means forcing the rallies to go the way you want them to. In general, that means hitters hit, loopers loop, blockers block, and so on. How to you go about doing this?There are two basic ways of controlling a match. One is to develop a style where you can force your strengths on your opponent. The other way is to develop an all-around style that adjusts to your opponent so that you can play on his weaknesses. In both cases it is your serve and receive that will often allow you to take control.Forcing Your Strengths on an OpponentFirst you must develop or identify your strengths. Once that is developed, you need to develop your game, especially your serve and receive game, so as to put these strengths into play. All options have advantages and disadvantages.For example, if you serve short backspin, it'll often be pushed long, allowing a looper to loop, and allowing a hitter to loop to set up his hitting. But it might also be pushed short, or pushed quick and aggressively off the bounce at a wide angle, or flipped, and any of these three might give the receiver control of the point. So you might vary this by serving short sidespin or no-spin serves that look like backspin, and watch the receiver struggle against the varying spin (or no-spin).If you serve long (either fast or a breaking sidespin), you might get a soft topspin return that you can loop or hit. But it risks letting the opponent loop, which can put a looper or hitter on the defensive and the receiver in control. But this might set up a quick blocker.Better still, use both types of serves, and by varying them, completely dominate the poor receiver, who can never adjust to your constantly varying serves.How do you force your strengths on the opponent when he's serving? See the previous examples, but from the receiver's point of view. Take control of the point against short serves by dropping them short, pushing aggressively, and flipping. Against deep serves, attack. Use placement and variation to take control of the point.Playing on Your Opponent’s WeaknessesThe other option is to develop an all-around style where you can adjust to the opponent's weaknesses. For example, if the opponent isn't very fast, you might adopt a blocking game, and quick-block side to side. Use your serve and receive to force these types of rallies, perhaps with deep serves that force topspin returns you can quick-block.Or if the opponent has trouble blocking against slow, spinny loops, serve short and get ready to loop any long push returns. If the opponent doesn't have a good put-away shot, then you might combine a steady game with sudden attacks, knowing you can take your time and pick your shots since the opponent isn't a threat to end the point. If your opponent has a strong forehand but weaker backhand, you might simply play everything wide to his backhand. If he's the type that plays his forehand from the backhand side, then perhaps go to the forehand first (perhaps with a short serve, an aggressive receive, or a quick block), then come back to the backhand and pin him down there.There's also a psychology to controlling a match. You have certain tools in your tactical toolbox, i.e. your entire arsenal of shots (serves, receives, strokes, footwork). Think of your racket as your magic wand, and use it to completely dominate an opponent with these tools, and have the confidence to do so. If you don't have the tools to do this, then it's time to think about your game and what new tools you need, and develop them.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1835title: June 2, 2014 - Playing Short pipsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Short pips dominated the 1960s and much of the 1970s. (They are often called pips-out, which can be confusing as long pips is also pips-out, though conventionally speaking pips-out means short pips.) But by the 1990s inverted was pretty much dominating. The last great short pips player was probably Liu Guoliang, the 1996 Olympic Gold Medalist for Men's Singles and the 1999 World Men's Singles Champion. But as two-winged loopers became more and more powerful while playing closer to the table, and with the ball going from 38mm to 40mm in 2000 (which slowed the game down some, a disadvantage for most short pips players) the day of the short pips player pretty much died – there are very few left at the elite levels. At the club level, the style is also dying out as the huge majority players use inverted.But one of the ironies of this is that since there are fewer short-pips players, inverted players often no longer know how to play them. And so the time is ripe for short pips players to dominate again – at least at the intermediate level, where players not only don't know how to play them, but don't yet have the powerful and consistent looping games of the elite.I had great difficulty my first few years against short-pips players, but I played against several of them regularly - and then they became one of the easiest surfaces for me to play against. Since I'm used to playing them and know how to do so, I'd rather play a short pips player now than an inverted one any day - you've got a gun and he's using a bow and arrow. (But beware - some of these short pips players are still deadly with their bow and arrow!)So how do you play a short-pips player? This is sort of like asking how to play an inverted player; there are many styles of short pips players. But here are some general tips that will work against nearly all short pips players.Keep the ball deep on the table. This both makes things difficult for the short pips player, but also gives you more time to react to a ball that you aren't as used to. Against a deep ball he can't rush you, nor can he create heavy spin.Don't take on a short pips player in a battle of quickness. Find your comfort zone, as close to the table as you are comfortable and consistent. When in trouble (especially if rushed), back up and spin the ball deep on the table.Remember that than their blocks and hits are deader than you expect since you are used to playing inverted, so if you don't adjust by aiming your loops and drives slightly higher, you'll go into the net. Because the ball is dead, you'll have to use a bit more force to generate the same amount of topspin. (An incoming topspin ball rebounds out with topspin, while you can convert the spin of an incoming backspin ball into topspin. You can't do either with a dead ball.) One problem you'll have to overcome is many short pips players will rush you, and so you have less time to stroke, and yet you may need a longer stroke to generate topspin if you are looping. Or just go with a bit less spin, but control the ball deep on the table.If you keep looping into the net, don't think of the short pips block as a block; think of it as a very quick push without that much spin.Surprisingly, many players have the opposite problem when looping against a short-pips blocker - they loop off the end. This is because they are rushed, and when rushed, most players lift over-react and lift too much. Perhaps more importantly, they back off the table expecting the ball to jump out to them (as an inverted ball would), and so by the time the ball gets to them, it's dropping, and so the looper has to adjust and lift a ball that's dropping - and they often over-react by over-lifting, and go off the end.Remember that their serves and pushes have less spin than you are used to. The real problem here is that if you are used to playing inverted players, your instinctive reaction is off, as you'll reflexively expect more spin. The only cure is to play against them, and learn to adjust.Most important, play against short pips players every chance you can, and you'll become comfortable against them and soon realize why short pips has almost died out at the higher levels. They are easy to play against once you are used to playing them. They cannot put as much spin on the ball, so short pips serves, pushes, and loops (which they can do against backspin) are less spinny, which is a weakness when you get used to it. They don't have as much topspin to pull the ball down, and so have difficulty against deep and spinny topspins and backspin. Because short pips doesn't rebound the ball out as easily as inverted, short pips players have to stroke the ball more when blocking and hitting, and so they are weaker when they have to move, especially in covering the middle, so attack there every chance. Ultimately, a good looper can turn most short pips players into blockers, and in the modern game, winning by blocking is more and more difficult than by looping. (But there are still some very good blockers out there.)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1830title: May 26, 2014 - Random Drillsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the best ways to improve is through multiball training, and one of the best drills you can do there (besides an intense stroke workout) are random drills. When you play a match, you don't know where your opponent is going to put the ball, so you have to be ready to cover the whole table.A beginner or anyone working to develop their strokes should mostly do rote drills, where the player knows where the ball is going each time so they can focus on the stroke itself. At the advanced levels they still do rote drills, but mostly to tune the strokes and develop faster and faster footwork. As players develop, and especially at higher levels, players do more and more random drills. This allows them to develop the nearly instant reactions to incoming shots that they will face in a match.You could, of course, just play matches, which is the ultimate random drill. But while that's important, you also want to focus on specific shots to react to. For example, if you want to react to whether a fast incoming ball goes to your forehand or backhand, you can get limited practice with this in a game, with perhaps two or three shots per rally, and then go pick up the ball. Or you could have a coach feed continuous multiball, and you get maybe twenty times the practice on this in the same amount of time.A problem with random drills is that you can't really do them very well live (i.e. with a practice partner) until both players are relatively advanced. And so players generally don't do them until they are somewhat proficient - and then they practically have to start from scratch doing random drills that they should have been doing early on. Once you can hit a decent forehand or backhand you should be doing some sort of random drills as well. Few do so.So get a coach or a practice partner you can take turns with, and do random multiball drills. At first have them feed the ball randomly to two spots - middle forehand and middle backhand. Make sure your first move is the right one; you have more time than you think, so don't rush. When you are comfortable at doing this at rally speeds, then go random the whole table. Learn to cover all five spots - wide forehand, middle forehand, middle, middle backhand, and wide backhand.Let me emphasize - the key is that the first move must be the right move. No moving to the forehand and then changing when you see the ball going to the backhand, or vice versa.Once you can do this proficiently in multiball, you should practice it live. Ideally you would at first do this with a coach or top player, who can control the ball well and keep the rallies going. But in most cases you'll need to do this with a practice partner who is more your own level. For this drill, you would play all of your shots to the same spot, either to your practice partner's backhand or forehand. As with multiball, start by having your partner hit randomly to just two spots (middle forehand or middle backhand), where you have to react properly to both shots and consistently drive the ball back to the pre-arranged spot. When you are proficient in this, then have your partner place the ball all over, in particular to the middle, which is often the hardest spot to cover. (Here's a Tip of the Week, "Covering the Middle.")When you are proficient at this drill in all its variations, and at speeds that approach match speeds, you will be able to do the same in a match, and your rallying ability and overall level will shoot up.Here's a short video(26 seconds) of Soo Yeon Lee doing random multiball. She's hitting; depending on your level and playing style, you can do this hitting or looping.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1823title: May 19, 2014 - Why You Should Systematically Practice Receivedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players spend lots of time systematically practicing their strokes and footwork. Each week they'll put in many hours practicing their forehand and backhand loops, drives, blocks, and all the other strokes in their repertoire. They'll practice their footwork. The smart and ambitious ones will evenpractice their serves, which often gives the most return on investment.And yet most rely on matches to practice their serves. This doesn't make sense. If you can use matches as your primary way to develop a technique, then that would be the primary way players would develop all their shots. But any coach or experienced player will tell you that you need to develop these shots with systematic training. You do need match play or drills that simulate match play, but that's in addition to the systematic training needed to develop the shot itself.So why do players rely on matches to develop their receive? My theory has always been that most players don't want to let rivals practice against their serves. Two players will gladly practice together, letting the opponent get used to all their shots, except for their serves. It's seems almost rude to ask a player to let you practice against their serves, since it seems as if you are practicing just to beat that player. And, unfortunately, there's some truth to this.But it's also a huge handicap to players who cannot get past this idea of practicing receive only in matches. It's a two-way thing, but you have to find someone with varied serves who can serve to you over and over to develop your receive. Ideally, get a coach or top player, even if you have to pay them. Or find a peer, and both agree to let the other practice against their serves. Try to find someone who has a variety of serves.And then practice against them. Practice attacking deep serves, usually with loops. Practice pushing short serves back long or short, and flipping them. Practice reading the varied spins. Practice against sidespins going in both directions, and against both topspin and backspin serves. Practice against every type of serve you might see in a match.By doing this systematic training, your receive will improve dramatically. Since most of your peers won't be doing this type of training, you will soon leave them behind. And you'll rarely have to utter those infamous words heard so often, "I could have beaten him if I could return his serve."===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1817title: May 12, 2014 - Anyone Can Become Very Good at Somethingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:It's hard to be great at something. Often it's said it takes about 10,000 hours to become truly great at something - and that's not just putting in the hours, that's working hard. (The "10,000 hour rule" is mentioned repeatedly in some books and article, such as "Outliers." It's not a strict rule, just a rough guideline) While we can debate on just how long it really takes to be truly great, and find all sorts of exceptions in both directions, it is a good approximation of what it takes, whether it's in sports, arts, academics, or most other fields.The problem is that 10,000 hours takes 10,000 hours. Most people have jobs or school, and other obligations such as family, etc., and can't devote their lives to this. Suppose you do three times a week for two hours. Then it's going to take 33 years to get to 10,000 hours! The problem in table tennis is by that time you'll probably be past your physical peak. More importantly, if you take 33 years to get to those 10,000 hours, most of those 10,000 hours are wasted as you forget much of the early training, i.e. 10,000 hours over 33 years isn't the same as 10,000 hours in ten years (i.e. about 20 hours/week). It needs to be a bit more condensed.What does this mean for you, the average player who can't put in 20 hours a week for a decade? It means you probably aren't going to be world champion, or even seriously challenge the players who compete to be world champion. It's a bitter pill to swallow, but someone has to tell you the truth.But guess what? Anyone can becomevery goodat something, and it doesn't take anywhere close to 10,000 hours in ten years. Pick out the aspects of table tennis where you can be good, and develop your game around that. It may take 10,000 hours to develop a truly world-class game, but it doesn't take that long to develop a very good serve, or a very good loop against backspin, a very good block, or any other specific aspect of your game. They key is to develop it properly, watching how the top players do it, perhaps working with a coach, and focus on developing it until it is very good. You can probably do that in 100 hours. (My serves are considered very good by most standards. I developed them mostly be practicing them 20 minutes a day, five days a week, for about a year. That's a little over 80 hours total.)Here's the double pay-off. If you develop one aspect of your game, other parts will follow. If you develop a very good serve, then you get lots of follow-up shots, and so you develop a very good attack. If you develop a very good loop against backspin, you'll get a lot of blocked returns, and you'll develop a very good follow-up to your opening loop. If you develop a very good block, you'll develop ways to win points that way, either with put-away shots after you've blocked your opponent out of position and forced a weak shot, or numerous other ways - more aggressive blocks, change-of pace blocks, pure steadiness, etc. And so on. (The three examples I give here are ones I myself went through.)And here's the triple pay-off. When parts of your game become very good, your overall level will tend to go up, and you'll end up playing better players - and they'll force you to raise your level to an even higher standard. So becoming very good at one shot often improves other aspects of your game, and brings up your whole level. One key here is to understand the whole process. Developing one shot doesn't mean it ends with just developing that shot - the end is to both developing that shot and the other techniques that go with that shot, i.e. setting it up and following it up.So what are you waiting for? If a "pro" has to put in 10,000 hours, can you do 1% of that, and put in 100 hours to develop one aspect until it's very good, knowing the double and triple pay-offs that will follow? Go to it.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1809title: May 5, 2014 - Returning Smashes and Loop Killsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Starting at the intermediate level players begin to realize that they can actually return put-away shots, whether it's by blocking, countering, fishing, lobbing, or chopping. There's no magically fast reflexes needed, just a little knowledge and technique. Here are some tips on how to put pressure on your opponent by returning their put-aways - and remember, they are often off balance and rushed if you return them, and will often miss the next shot.1) Depth. Probably the most important part of returning a put-away shot takes place with your previous shot. If that shot landed short on the table, then you both have little time to react to the opponent's shot and you have more ground to cover since you've given the opponent a wide angle. So if you are going to make a weak shot that the opponent is going to try to put away, keep the weak shot deep on the table.2) Away from Table. You need time to react to the opponent's put-away, so step off the table to give yourself time. Even blockers may have to block from a step back.3) Ready Stance. You need to be in a proper ready stance that allows you to quickly move in either direction. This means feet at least slightly wide, weight on balls of feet, knees bent, leaning forward slightly from the waist, racket in front of you pointing at the opponent.4) Watch and Study Opponent. You can read the direction of a put-away shot before your opponent hits the ball. First, watch his shoulders. They usually line up in the direction of a forehand shot. Second, watch the direction of the forward swing, which should also tell you the direction. Third, be aware of the opponent's position. If he's way around his backhand corner but facing toward your backhand, it might be difficult for him to go down the line, and so he'll likely go crosscourt. And fourth, be aware of your opponent's habits. Many players will go the same way over and over, often crosscourt, so if necessary you can anticipate that direction.5) Step to Ball. Amateurs react to a hard-hit ball by reaching; top players react by stepping, and reaching only when necessary. Many players believe they just don't have time to step to the ball, but that's because they have developed the habit of reaching instead of the habit of stepping. Learn both; you can cover more ground more quickly if you both step and reach.6) Placement. The goal isn't just to return the put-away shot; the goal is to win the point. If you can return a put-away shot, you can also place it. So focus not only on getting the ball back but on placement and depth. Depth is a must or the opponent will just cream the ball again, and likely won't miss. Keep it deep, and he'll both make more mistakes and you'll have a better chance of continuing the rally. If you move the ball side to side you are more likely to force a mistake.7) Practice. Of course you can't return a put-away shot in a game if you don't practice it. Can you do anything at a relatively high level in a game without practicing it first? So find ways to practice returning put-aways. It'll not only make you a better practice, it's fun!8) Confidence. It's not enough to just go through the motions; you have to believe you can do it. If you are confident you can return a shot you won't hesitate to go for the return, and you'll have a much better chance of making the return. Just watch your opponent and the ball and let your subconscious react. With practice, it'll become easier than you'd think. Decide what your primary way of returning a put-away shot will be (blocking, countering, fishing, lobbing, or chopping) and become a master of that shot.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1803title: April 28, 2014 - Develop the Fundamentals: Strokes & Footworkdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:At the 2004 USA Nationals, Cheng Yinghua, 46, became the oldest Men’s Singles Champion in history, and the four semifinalists averaged over 40 years old. This was unique in a sport that is usually dominated by younger, faster players. When asked what the younger players needed to do to compete with these veterans, four-time U.S. Men’s champ and full-time coach Cheng said, “The younger players had not put enough training time and effort into the fundamentals.Fundamentals, fundamentals, fundamentals.Some find them boring, but they are probably the three most important things in being a Champion. No one becomes a champion in this sport without a solid foundation in the fundamentals.Many find it the “boring” part of training, since fundamentals are mostly developed through repetition, but they are absolutely necessary.Fundamentals, fundamentals, fundamentals.They don’t need to be boring. At the beginning level, where repetition isn’t easy, it should be a challenge just to do the repeating strokes. As players advance, they should work in more and more advanced drills, which leads both to more advanced play and more interesting practice.What are the Fundamentals?The fundamentals include both proper stroking and footwork technique. Tactics, mental and physical conditioning, even great serve and receive don’t help a lot if you don’t have the fundamentals down.At its most basic level, table tennis involves moving into position, and then stroking the ball. Along the way, you have to choose which stroke to use, read the incoming ball and adjust the stroke and racket angle to it. But if you can’t move and stroke properly, nothing will help you.The actual specifics of how to move and stroke are outside the scope of this article. For these, you really need a coach, although videos and books can also help. (Yes, it would take an entire book to cover the fundamentals.) You can find coaches atwww.usatt.org/coaching. You can find books and videos from most major table tennis dealers. (Here's where you can find mine.)The purpose of fundamentals is to develop consistency in your shots. To be consistent, you need to both be in position for each shot, and use the same repeating strokes over and over. That’s what fundamentals are all about.Footwork FundamentalsTo be a Champion, you have to develop proper footwork to that you are able to catch every ball in your forehand or backhand hitting zones.Some players just stand at the table, and reach for the ball. If the ball just happens to be in the perhaps one-foot area that’s convenient for their strokes, they hit a good shot. If it’s outside that area, they have to adjust their shot – and so lose consistency. A good player will rarely hit a ball that you don’t have to move to.Stroking FundamentalsTo be a Champion, you have to develop repeating strokes, strokes that you can do over and over and over and (my god!) over and over and over. At the advanced level, this means many strokes, including forehand and backhand drives, loops, blocks, pushes, flips, and perhaps even lobbing and chopping. It’s hard enough learning all these shots against all the different incoming balls (different spins, speeds, depth, direction, height, etc.). Now imagine having to do so while changing your stroke each time! Instead, develop a simple repeating stroke, and then all you have to do is essentially adjust the racket angle and perhaps the trajectory of the stroke.Beginning FundamentalsMany coaches swear by the “100” theory – you don’t work on much of anything else until you can do 100 forehand and 100 backhand drives with a proper stroke. To a beginner, this is a real challenge, and should be an exciting challenge. The same is true of each of the other strokes – they are a challenge at the beginning level, and striving to do a certain number in a row is a challenge. As the stroke is learned, the fundamental footwork should be learned with footwork drills, so moving to each ball and stroking it properly becomes … fundamental.For each new drill involving a new stroke or some combination of stroking and footwork, beginners can see how many they can do in a row. It’s an exciting challenge, and sometimes they forget along the way that they are getting better and better!Intermediate & Advanced FundamentalsAt the intermediate level, the player can do all the strokes consistently with proper repeating strokes. At this point, it’s time to get the fundamentals into game-like situations. This means doing drills that include more and more variation, and more and more random drills. Random drills are where the player doesn’t always know where the ball is going. If the fundamentals are mastered, a player can do this, at least at a slower pace. As the player advances, the speed of the drill can speed up. All players have a maximum speed at which they can still maintain the fundamentals; if you go beyond that speed, their fundamentals break down. By drilling, drilling, and more drilling, a player can increase the speed at which they can execute the fundamentals.Putting it TogetherTable tennis has been called chess at hyper speed. Imagine playing chess where you were missing a rook or queen. That’s what playing with poor fundamentals is. Proper fundamentals mean knowing you can execute the shots you call for in any given situation.Fundamentals, fundamentals, fundamentals.The Chinese tend to dominate table tennis worldwide. Most coaches would say that ultimately, the biggest advantage they have over their opponents is stronger fundamentals. It may be fun to play games, and they are important to improving, but the best players spend the majority of their training on … you guessed it, fundamentals. They may do it at a pace that doesn’t seem very fundamental, but that’s because of years and years of developing these fundamentals until they can do them at that pace. Why are they still working on them? So they can do them consistently at an even faster pace against anything an opponent can throw at them.If you want to be a Champion, you’ll do the same.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1796title: April 21, 2014 - Every Battle Is Won Before the Battle Beginsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The title is a famous quote formSun Tzu, the famous Chinese military strategist and philosopher. It's from his bookThe Art of War, but much of it equally applies to sports. This quote capsulizes what should be obvious to table tennis players - that a match is, indeed, won before it begins. Let's look at what goes into winning a match.First off is yourequipment. That is chosen before the match begins.Next are yourtechniques, the most important aspect. This means your strokes, serves, receive, and footwork. But these are all developed before the match begins.Next is thephysical aspect. Again, any physical training is done in advance, and other aspects (height, age, health and injuries, etc.) are also determined before the match begins.Then there's themental aspect, perhaps the most varied part from match to match. But any mental training (or lack thereof) also comes before the match. Even if you haven't had any mental training, the mental habits you pick up are pretty much set before the match begins. If you are the nervous type who falls apart under pressure, then you were the nervous wreck who falls apart under pressure before the match began. If you are the type who is cool under pressure and plays great when the match is on the line, you were that way coming into the match. If you want to change or improve these aspects, you need to do it before the match.Finally, there is yourtactical game. But again, your tactical skills (or lack thereof) were developed before the match. If you have a coach, that is normally arranged before the match. And if you want to scout your opponent out before the match starts or talk to someone who knows the player, and develop a tactical plan, that too takes place before the match.Now anyone can get technical and point out that no matter how much preparation you do there is still some randomness - nets and edges, how well the opponent plays, even the accuracy of advice given from others. But while these are unknowns going into the match, it is your preparation before the match that sets the chances of your winning, given the circumstances. This includes the mental aspect, the part that most varies from match to match for most players. Players are often stronger mentally in some matches than others - which really shows a mental weakness in the times when they are not mentally strong, something that can be overcome with sports psychology training. But the preparation before the match sets the odds of being mentally strong in a given match. Perhaps the article could better be titled, "The Odds of Winning a Match Are Set Before the Match Begins." But in the long run, it's the same thing.So the next time you are getting ready to play a tournament, don't worry about how well you'll play. Worry about how well you've prepared.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1791title: April 14, 2014 - Pushing Sidespin Serves Shortdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:This tip is a bit technical mostly for higher-level players, but it is also for those who wish to understand the game at those higher levels. Thinking about spins and reacting to them in the way that we'll here might give you a headache. You have been warned.With practice, most players can learn to push short against a simple short backspin serve. (Here's a Tip of the Week,Pushing Short.) However, it takes lots of practice to be able to do this in a match where you don't know in advance what type of serve you'll be getting. The problem with pushing short isn't so much against backspin serves, but against sidespin serves, which are often pushed back high and to the side. (Another problem is pushing short against no-spin serves that look like backspin, where you have to chop down on the ball, but that's a separate issue.) There's a somewhat simple trick for pushing these sidespin serves short.Imagine a forehand pendulum serve (or another serve with this type spin) coming short to your backhand with mostly sidespin and perhaps some backspin. (We're assuming both players are righties; lefties can adjust.) If you try pushing short and don't adjust properly, the ball pops up and to your right. It's almost like pushing against a topspin. Now drop your racket tip some, and meet the ball a little on the bottom right side with a grazing motion, with a slightly downward motion. Instead of popping up to your right as it would when you push against sidespin, it'll go out as if you were pushing a backspin because you are now meeting the spin head-on, as if pushing against a backspin. With this technique, you'll find it much easier to drop the ball short to the left, i.e. short to the opponent's forehand.Now imagine a backhand serve (or another serve with this type spin) coming short to your backhand with mostly sidespin and perhaps some backspin. If you try pushing short and don't adjust properly, the ball pops up and to your left. Again, it's almost like pushing against a topspin. Now raise your racket tip some, and meet the ball a little on the bottom left side with a grazing motion, with a slightly downward motion. Instead of popping up to the left as it would when you push against sidespin, it'll go out as if you were pushing a backspin because you are again meeting the spin head-on, as if pushing against a backspin. With this technique, you'll find it much easier to drop the ball short to the right, i.e. short to the opponent's backhand.With some adjustments, you can use this type of technique to drop the ball anywhere, but in general on the backhand side it's easier to drop a forehand pendulum serve type spin short to the forehand, and a backhand serve type spin to the backhand side. You can make the same adjustments with your forehand push, raising the racket tip some against forehand pendulum serve type spins, lowering it against backhand serve type spins. With practice, you'll find dropping the ball short against a short sidespin to be as easy as doing it against a short backspin. (Of course, pushing short against short backspin isn't "easy" unless you practice it to develop the light touch necessary - but it's a valuable tool to have against many players, so learn to do so.)If you are having trouble visualizing all this, then imagine the opponent's forehand pendulum sidespin serve. Take a ball and actually rotate it with that type of spin as it comes toward you. Now imagine pushing it, and see how it would jump to the right (the opponent's backhand). Now drop the racket tip, and presto - you are meeting the spin head-on, like pushing backspin to backspin, and thereby getting much more control, just as you do when pushing against a backspin.The same technique can also be used to push long, but is not always as effective there since for deep pushes you want to maximize the backspin. For this, you'd more likely just aim the opposite way as the sidespin, and chop down on the ball.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1786title: April 7, 2014 - Attacking the Middledate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The middle is the weakest spot for most players. When I say middle, I don't mean the middle of the table; it's the mid-point between the opponent's forehand and backhand, usually where the playing elbow is. Most beginning players play to the opponent's forehand or backhand, while most intermediate players play wider angles. Advanced players know that while angled attacks are good, the best place for the first attack (and often follow-up attacks) is right at the middle.Why is the middle so weak when attacked? There are five (yes,five!) primary reasons.The player has to make a decision on whether to play forehand or backhand, and often hesitates. When the ball goes to the forehand or backhand there is no such decision to make.The player has to move in an uncomfortable direction. Most players find moving wide to cover the forehand or backhand an easier move since you are moving into the shot. Covering the middle means essentially getting out of the way of the ball, which is usually a more difficult move.When you attack the middle, it forces your opponent to move out of position to cover it. This opens up the corners. One of the best one-two combos is an attack to the middle followed by an angled attack. Or you can go to the middle a second or third time as your opponent struggles to cover it.Attacking the middle takes away the extreme angles for your opponent. If you attack a wide corner, your opponent can return at an equally wide angle.Players don't get much practice covering the middle, both because opponents don't give them this shot much until the higher levels, and because most don't practice against it. (Here are three Tips on covering the middle:Covering the Middle;Covering and Recovering From the Middle; andCovering the Middle with the Forehand.)Attacking the middle isn't just an option; it should be the default place to attack unless you have a reason to go elsewhere, such as an open corner, a slow opponent who doesn't cover the corners well, or an opponent who is weaker on one side. The nice thing about attacking the middle is that even if the opponent knows it's coming he can't really prepare for it. If he tries to favor one side to cover it, you simply move your target over to compensate.While you should usually be aggressive when going to the middle, there are at least two other times you might go to the middle with a less aggressive shot. First, against a two-winged attacker, you might serve or push deep to the middle to make him decide whether to forehand or backhand attack and then move to do so. Second, going to the middle cuts off the angles, so a passive shot can't be attacked at a wide angle. (But a smart opponent might instead attack your middle!)Why don't players attack the middle more often? There are two primary reasons. First, it's difficult to hit because it's a moving target. When you attack the wide forehand or wide backhand, it's the same place no matter who you play. But the middle changes not only from player to player but throughout the rally against the same opponent, depending on where he is standing or looking to do. (An example of the latter is if the opponent is looking to attack with his forehand, then going to his middle only gives him an easier forehand, so his "middle" moves toward his backhand side.) The only way to develop the ability to attack this moving target is by doing it over and over in matches and drills until it becomes second nature. And this leads to the second reason players don't attack the middle more often: because they don'tpracticeattacking the middle.Most players practice their attacks either crosscourt or down the line to their partner's block, and so they go to the partner's forehand or backhand, over and over. This becomes a habit. If all one does is attack to the forehand or backhand in practice, how likely is the player going to go to the middle in a match? You have to practice it if you want to do it in a match. Here are some drills you can do to practice attacking the middle.Attack the Middle Drill. Have your practice partner stand in a neutral position so you can see where his middle is. Then drill into that spot, either looping or hitting. Your practice partner blocks moves over and blocks, either all forehand or all backhand. However, there are two variations to this. You partner can also block with either all backhand or forehand, but moves back to a neutral position after each shot, so he can practice moving to cover the middle. A third way, the most difficult, is he stands in a neutral position and blocks back either forehand or backhand.Serve and Attack Middle Drill. You serve backspin, your partner pushes back (either to a pre-arranged spot or random), and you attack his middle. Then play out the point.Practice Matches. Play practice matches where your first attack goes to the middle every time.So learn to attack the middle, and soon you'll leave the middle of the pack as you move up the ladder of table tennis success!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1779title: March 31, 2014 - Get the Right Feeldate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The worst thing a coach can do is try to fill a player's head with all sorts of things he must do to get a shot right, and the worst thing a player can do is try to memorize all these things. A coach might look at a player and see several things that need fixing. But the last thing he wants is for the student to have to be thinking something like, "Let's see, my feet need to be like this, my arm like this, I have to rotate this way, keeping the racket at this height and my elbow bent this much, and then I need to start the swing with this part of my body, followed by that part, then that part, and finally that part, and make sure contact is like this, and then follow through so my racket goes here." That's how you might program a computer, but not a human brain!!!Instead, the goal of a player (and therefore the goal of the coach) is to find the right "feel" of the shot. If all the aspects of a short are done properly, it should feel right, and once a player does a shot just right (perhaps with a coach pointing out the "right" ones), the player should never memorize all the aspects that went into making the shot right. He just needs to remember the feel of the shot - the feel of the stroke, the contact, and the timing, all of which go together.Once a player gets the feel right, all he has to do is repeat that feel over and over, with minor changes based on the incoming shot that mostly affect racket angle. At its most basic level, that's all there is to learning a new technique - getting the feel right, and then repeating it. However, it's not always that easy. Two common problems are 1) getting the feel right when there are two things wrong, and 2) getting the right feel for forehand and backhand shots while using mostly the same grip.Often a player has trouble doing proper technique because he's doing two things wrong, leading to an awkward but at least workable shot. If the player tries to fix one of the problems, the stroke falls apart unless he simultaneously fixes the other problem, which can be difficult to do together. For example, a player may have an improper grip, leading to an awkward stroking technique. But if he fixes the grip, it messes up the timing in the awkward stroking technique, and so the player gets worse, not better. The player has to both change the grip and the stroking technique at the same time. To do this takes practice, often with a coach - but once done properly, the player can remember the "feel" of the proper grip and stroke, and then he can learn to do it over and over.Often a player learns the right feel for a forehand and backhand shot, but with different grips. This usually won't work - most players use the same grip for forehand and backhand shots, with only minor changes. (You don't have time for major grip changes.) So a player needs to not only get the right feel for each shot, but the right feel using a grip that can be used for other shots.So focus on getting the right feel for your shots, and it'll feel more and more natural as you develop the timing - and soon you'll be feeling (and playing) like a champion!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1766title: March 24, 2014 - Isolating Techniques and Combinationsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the more important concepts you should use in your training is to isolate specific techniques so you can work on them. At its most simple you work on individual shots, such as a forehand or backhand drive, loop, or push. Most players understand this and spend countless hours perfecting these shots.However, once these shots are perfected in practice, should you go straight to matches? Probably not. Instead, the next step would be to isolate various combinations. For example, many players regularly loop against backspin, and then follow with a loop or smash against the likely blocked return. First you'd want to develop the loop against backspin, and the loop or smash against block. But once you have these two shots down, it's time to put them together. For example, you do a drill where you serve backspin to your partner's backhand; he pushes it back to a pre-set spot (such as your middle backhand); you loop a forehand (or backhand) to your partner's backhand; he blocks to your forehand; then you loop or smash that ball anywhere, and then it's free play until the rally ends. As simple as this is, this is one of the most important drills for most developing players.Another example might be to have your partner push and then block to your backhand, and you backhand loop the first (or drive, if that's how you attack backspin), and follow with a backhand loop or drive against the block, then free play. This backhand one-two combo is extremely valuable and comes up in matches all the time, and yet many players fail to practice it.There are many other example, though opening against a backspin and following up against a block is probably the most common. They key here is that you have to lift some against the backspin, while you don't lift much against the follow-up shot against a block, but unless you practice it, you might find yourself accidentally lifting the second ball and watching it go off the end.If you are a hitter you might serve fast topspin to your partner's backhand; your partner counter-hits back your backhand; you backhand hit to your partner's backhand (or some other pre-set spot), he counter-hits to your backhand again (not too hard), and you step around and smash a forehand, then it's free play.You can also add some serve and receive. For example, have your partner serve short backspin to your forehand (or backhand); you push back to a preset spot (and perhaps push short); partner pushes to your backhand; you backhand loop. Or some other version of this.You can also add some more randomness to the drills. For example, you serve backspin to your partner's backhand, he pushes back randomly anywhere on the table, you loop (forehand or backhand) to his backhand, and he blocks either randomly or to a pre-set spot, and then free play. Or, if you do that drill well, go random on this drill from the start. If you are a hitter serving fast topspin, your partner can return anywhere and you have to follow with a smash, forehand or backhand. (Note - there aren't too many pure hitters at the higher levels anymore, alas.)Think about your game and what types of shots and combinations you use (or should be using). Isolate two shots that you commonly do in combination. Then design a drill for those two shots and go out and practice!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1761title: March 17, 2014 - Three Types of Receive Skillsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Returning serve skills can be broken down into three specific skills. To be a great returner of serves you need all of them. The three are the ability to 1) read and react to the serve; 2) make consistent returns; and 3) make effective returns. Let's look at all three.Read and React to the Serve.All the great shots in the world won't help you if you can't read and react to the serve. This means reading and reacting to what type of spin is on the ball; the direction; the depth; the speed; even the height. You read the spin by watching the direction of the opponent's racket at contact with the ball, and by watching how the ball travels through the air and bounces on the table.Make Effective Returns.This means returning the serve in such a way that the server loses his advantage, and either get into a neutral rally or one where you have the advantage. For example, you may attack the serve by looping, driving, or flipping to put the server on the defensive. (Down side: it's easy to miss.) You may place the ball so the server is unable to follow with a strong shot. (Down side: it's not easy to receive accurately against a varied serve with lots of speed and/or spin.) You may push aggressively with heavy backspin to stop the server's attack. (Down side: Server may loop it, and turn your backspin into his own topspin.) You may push the ball back short so the server cannot loop. (Down side: it takes great ball control, and it's easy to pop the ball up, go into the net, or simply not push short enough.)Make Consistent Returns.It's not enough to make effective returns; you have to be consistent. Most top players will tell you that returning serves is all about ball control. They may attack the serve when they see the chance, but mostly they just want to neutralize things while being extremely consistent. This doesn’t mean just pushing every serve back; it means using all of your receives to mess up the opponent, but doing so at a level where you rarely give away a free point.Here are some other Tips of the Week on returning serves. Receive is often called everyone's weakness, but it doesn't have to be. Many players turn it into a strength. Why not you?Reading Service SpinWhat is the Goal of the ReceiverHow to Return Different ServesThe Many Ways to Receive a Short Backspin ServeReturning Long Serves with the BackhandReturning the Tomahawk Serve (or a Lefty Pendulum Serve)Returning Hidden and Other Tricky Spin Serves===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1755title: March 10, 2014 - Reading Service Spindate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Returning serves effectively takes longer to learn to do than any other part of the game. This is due to the incredible variations in spin, speed, direction and depth available to servers. Worse, a good server disguises every aspect of the serve, especially the spin. We're going to focus the most difficult part here - reading spin. (For more info on spin, see my articleEverything You Wanted to Know About Spin - But Were Afraid to Ask.)Ideally, a player should read the spin off the server's racket. No matter how many motions a server goes through, all a receiver has to do is read the direction of the racket at contact, and he will have read the type of spin. This is easier said than done.The receiver also needs to read the amount of spin. Against a somewhat grippy inverted rubber, this is roughly done by a simple formula: racket speed - ball speed = ball spin. What this means is that a server's racket speed at contact will convert to ball speed and ball spin; if the racket moves fast, but the ball comes out slowly, then most of the energy has been converted to spin. (It's actually a bit more complicated than this. You get more spin if you accelerate into the ball rather than moving the racket at a constant speed, but it's close enough. Plus you have to take into consideration the grippiness of the rubber, as a non-grippy surface will have less spin.)A server disguises spin in three major ways. First, his racket may go through a semi-circular motion, with contact at any point on the curve. This way, a server may give different spins with the exact same serve motion - the only difference is where in the serve motion contact is made. At the advanced levels, this semi-circular motion is so short and quick it's very hard to pick up.Second, a server may disguise spin by mixing up spin and no-spin serves. (If a receiver thinks there is spin on the ball, and there isn't, it's the same as misreading a spin.) There are two ways the server may do this. A server may contact the ball near the throat of the racket, where the racket travels slower than the tip. Or he may fake a grazing motion, but just pat the ball with the racket straight on. In both cases, the server may use an exaggerated racket snap after contact.Third, the server may put so much spin on the ball that it is simply difficult to read the amount of spin.The only way to learn to return serves is to understand them, and to practice against them. So how do you read the spin?As your opponent is serving, keep your eyes on his racket. (Against a high-toss serve, you may glance up to see when the ball will be coming down - but as it comes down, you should be watching the racket.) Ignore the direction the racket is moving until contact. Then, right at contact - SNAP! Take a flash "video" in your mind of the split second of contact. In this split-second video, you should be able to see the direction and speed the racket was going at contact. From this, you can judge the type of spin. From the racket speed, and the speed of the ball after contact, you can judge the amount of spin.What happens if you absolutely cannot read the spin off the racket? Or if contact is hidden? If the contact is hidden (which isn't legal, though it often isn't enforced), you will have to read the spin mostly from the ball alone. The type of sidespin on the ball should be easy to read from the general racket motion - left to right or right to left. It's the reading of topspin vs. backspin that's tricky.A ball with backspin tends to travel in a line, and slows down when it bounces on the table. A ball with topspin drops quickly, and jumps when it hits the table. A sidespin ball will curve sideways in the air, and jump sideways when it hits the table. If you let the ball come out to you and take the ball late, you will have more time to read this, and make the proper adjustments. However, reading from the ball alone will make your receive more tentative and late, and so less effective.Eventually, reading spin will become more and more natural, and you won't even think about it so much. Then you can concentrate on what to do with the ball.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1750title: March 4, 2014 - Changing Bad Techniquedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:How does one go about changing bad technique? Most players use halfway measures, and when that doesn't work, they give up and go back to their old habits. They may try minor adjustments when a major one is needed. They may change from one poor technique to another. They may practice it properly, but then, before the proper technique is ingrained, they'll play competitive matches and fall back into old habits, thereby re-ingraining the poor technique. They may have an improper grip or stance which causes the poor technique. Or they simply don't know what needs to be fixed. How can you overcome this? Here are five recommendations.First, drop out of tournaments and match play for a while and focus on fixing the technique. Hit regularly with a coach or practice partner as you fix the technique. Playing matches will just reinforce the bad technique. If your goal is to really overcome poor technique and replace it with good technique, then you need to have an extended period where you focus on this, i.e.saturation training. That means only playing with a coach or practice partner, and doing drills where you can isolate the new technique so you can focus on doing it correctly.Second, exaggerate the proper technique. If you don't rotate your shoulders enough on a shot, practice over-rotating until it becomes comfortable to do it the proper way.Shadow practicethe proper technique over and Over and OVER until you can do it in your sleep, on your deathbed, and most importantly, at deuce in the fifth.Third, watch top players (live or on video) who do the stroke well, and visualize yourself doing it that way. The more you visualize it done properly, the more likely you'll do it properly. Then shadow stroke it as you visualize it.Fourth, make sure yourgrip and stanceare correct. If you get these two correct, then everything in between tends to fall into place. If you get one of them wrong, then fixing a problem somewhere else won't work unless you fix the root cause of the problem - the grip or stance.Fifth, work with a coach. Fixing bad technique is his job. Let him do his job.Let me emphasize item #1 above. In general it's best to play lots of matches and get as much tournament competition as possible when trying to improve (along with lots of regular practice, i.e. drills), but when you are making major changes to your game, it's best to take time off from competition. Perhaps make a goal to have your game ready for tournament competition for a specific tournament (or series of tournaments) six months or so away, and train specifically for that. I don't think you need to take six months off from playing practice matches, but perhaps two months of focused practice without matches would greatly help you in making these technique changes.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1743title: February 24, 2014 - Backhand Sidespin Pushdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When pushing on the backhand, most players are at one of three levels:Level One: Get it back.Level Two: Do something with it. This usually means one of three things: Quick off the bounce and angled; heavy; or short. This is effective at all levels. But there's another level. . . .Level Three: Do even more!There are several examples of "more." You can aim your racket one way, and at the last instant go another, a must learn for any advanced player. You can fake heavy spin, and give no-spin by snapping the wrist vigorously just after contact. You should learn both of these. Another option is a sidespin push.There are different types of sidespin pushes, but what we'll cover here is the most common one: the backhand sidespin push, where the racket is going right to left at contact (for a righty).To do this shot, start with your racket a little above the ball and to the right. You want to take the ball off the bounce, so your opponent is rushed; the more time he has, the more likely he'll adjust to your sidespin. As the ball hits the table, stroke down and sideways (right to left). Some contact the ball toward the bottom of the racket, so they can take it quicker off the bounce, or you can contact in the middle of the racket for more control. The key is to put both backspin and sidespin on the ball.Placement is important. You usually want to do this shot to the opponent's wide backhand so it breaks into his backhand (assuming both players are righties or both are lefties). It's a tricky ball to backhand loop, and if he tries running around to use his forehand, the sidespin pulls the ball farther to the side then he's expecting.When a righty plays a lefty, both players have the option of using this shot so that it breaks into the wide forehand. Not only is it pulling away from the opponent, but this type of breaking away sidespin often causes more trouble to player's forehands than ones that break into the body (i.e. righty versus righty). It also puts him out of position. When a lefty serves to you (if you are a righty, or a righty serving to you if you are a lefty), and serves short to the backhand, this is an excellent return, into his wide forehand.The down side of this shot is that, because there is less backspin, an opponent who reads it properly can loop right through the ball, often off the bounce. So you don't want to over use this shot. However, done at proper times, it's a highly effective shot. It also puts one more thing in your opponent's mind to think about.One time this shot is especially useful is against an opponent's forehand sidespin serve (assuming two righties). You can use the opponent's sidespin against him, returning and adding to his own spin as you really sidespin your return into his wide backhand.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1737title: February 17, 2014 - Five-Ball Attackdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most players know what a third-ball attack is: you serve, the opponent returns, and you attack aggressively, usually with a loop, a smash, a hard-hit drive, or perhaps a quick off-the-bounce drive. It's that simple. But this means you are relying on your opponent to return your serve in a way that you can attack effectively. While you want to develop your third-ball attack, you also want to develop your five-ball attack as your fallback plan.What is a five-ball attack? You've probably already figured it out: you serve, opponent returns, you attack in a way to set up your next shot, opponent returns, and you attack aggressively (often with a smash or loop kill).A five-ball attack often is just a third-ball attack with one more shot. But if your opponent is making your third-ball attack difficult, you might want to vary it with a shot that's more difficult for your opponent to keep you from doing.In the "classic" five-ball attack, you serve backspin, opponent pushes back deep, you slow- or medium-speed loop, opponent blocks, and you end the point with a smash or loop kill.A deep, spinny loop is difficult to return without setting up your next shot. Depth is often most important - a slow loop that lands short on the opponent's side is easy to attack. (The exception to this is against a counterlooper who's too far off the table to react quickly to a slow loop that lands short.) A deep loop is much harder to return effectively. Plus, the very slowness of your slow loop gives you time to get into position for the next shot. This is why you can slow loop from the backhand corner with your forehand, and still be in position for the next shot, even if you aren't very fast.Placement is key. The best place is often right at the opponent's middle, the transition point between forehand and backhand, usually right at the elbow. This forces them to make a quick decision between forehand and backhand, and often leads to a weak or inconsistent return. Or go wide to the corners if the opponent has trouble covering them. A deep, spinny loop to the very wide backhand can often cause havoc.Many players have trouble serving and looping if their opponent pushes the serve back very heavy. This may mess up your third-ball attack, but it plays right into your fifth-ball attack. Use their backspin against them; let the ball drop slightly more than usual, and then really topspin away with a slow loop. In fact, sometimes don't even look for a third-ball "attack"; decide in advance that, unless you get an easy ball, you will serve and slow loop. This will help make your slow loop even more consistent, since there's no indecision.Finally, remember that you don't have to force a put-away with the fifth ball. If the shot isn't there, don't go for it; just play another aggressive shot if possible, and focus on the next ball, and so on.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1730title: February 10, 2014 - Never Give a Server What He's Looking Fordate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most players serve with a purpose. They are trying to get you to return their serve in a specific way so they can attack it. So . . . don't.The classic case is the forehand looper who serves backspin to your backhand, anticipating a push to his backhand. He steps around and forehand loops. If he's got good footwork, he'll usually follow that shot with at least one more forehand loop unless you make a great return. So he's getting two forehand loops in a row, exactly what he wants.Why not do a quick push to the wide forehand instead? If he's looking for a return to his backhand, you might catch him going the wrong way; many players have stronger forehand attacks from the backhand side (since the table isn't in the way); and if he does loop it, you can block to his backhand, and so he only gets one forehand attack. You've take his game away from him and so have a much better chance of winning.Or you could push the ball back short, and take away his loop altogether. Or you could attack the short serve. The key is to find something to do that he is not comfortable with. If he likes to follow his serve with a backhand loop if you push to his backhand, and a forehand loop if you push to his forehand, then perhaps do a quick push to the middle, rushing him as he tries to decide which side to attack with.If your opponent likes get into backhand exchanges, and so serves topspin, why give in to him? Learn to vary the return. Go to his forehand first, then quick to the backhand, so he has to both play his presumably less comfortable forehand, and then his backhand on the move. Or chop the serve back, which he doesn't want you to do, or he'd be serving backspin.Suppose your opponent has tricky serves that you keep pushing and popping up, and he keeps smashing your returns. Why is your ball popping up? Because you're pushing against a ball that doesn't have backspin. (It could be topspin, sidespin, or no-spin.) He loves it when you push it since it sets up his smash. But since it's topspin, it should be easy (with practice) to return with a simple topspin shot. Shorten your stroke, control the shot back, and you'll take away what your opponent wants you to do. (Sounds easy, doesn't it?)Corollary: Once you've established you are not going to give your opponent what he's looking for, a smart opponent will anticipate that, and expect you to do something different. That's when you cross him up with the return he was expecting before, but not now.So next time you play, figure out what your opponent wants, and give him something else.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1723title: February 3, 2014 - Winning with Ball Controldate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you cannot match up with your opponent with speed or spin, then you need other weapons. One of the best ways to beat faster and more powerful players ("bashers") is with ball control. Just as an all-out attacker uses his serve and receive to set up his attack, a ball control player uses serve and receive to take control of the rally. For him, it's all about ball control, placement, and shot selection. If he's able to use his ball control to make the basher uncomfortable, he's won the battle. So how do you do this?Start with receive, for it is while serving that bashers dominate, given the chance. But is he really dominating on his own, or are you letting him dominate? For example, if the basher has a strong forehand, and follows his serve with his forehand over and over, what are you doing to stop this? Few players can really dominate the whole table with the forehand against well-placed shots. Does the basher really do so, or is the receiver keeping the ball well inside the corners, so the basher doesn't have to cover the whole table? Ball control means ball control; the ball control player needs to be able to return the serve anywhere on the table. This means mostly one of two things: either pinning the basher down by relentlessly returning the ball to the extreme wide backhand (even outside the corner if returning crosscourt), or by aiming it there, and last-second returning it to the extreme wide forehand (again, even outside the corner for crosscourt shots). If you can't do this, then you don't have the ball control (yet) to play a ball control game. How can you learn to do so? By practicing it in game after game until you get it down.Now supposed your opponent attacks off his serve from both wings, so wide-angled returns to the backhand aren't really effective. Now the basher is ready to bash from both wings - or is he? Try quick returns to his elbow (or a little to his backhand if he favors the forehand from the middle), and watch his shots begin to crumble as he makes last-second decisions. Plus, by going to the middle, it draws the basher out of position, giving you an opening to the corners on the next shot.Now we move on to serving. The basher serves so he can attack, usually trying to end the point as quickly as possible. The ball control player should also mostly serve so he can attack, but in his case he's not trying to end the point quickly. He's looking to attack to make the basher uncomfortable, because the basher isn't comfortable when he's not attacking. So attack first, and force him to either defend or go for difficult counter-attacks. The key again is placement. Go to the side that gives the attacker the most trouble. If he can't block or counterloop consistently on the forehand, then nail him there over and over. Even if he does make the return - even a strong one - it opens him up on the backhand side. Or attack his middle (roughly his elbow), which should be your default opening attack anyway. Or if he's weak on the backhand defense (usually blocking), then go there. Or drive him crazy by going everywhere. Just do each shot with a purpose - to make the basher uncomfortable, and to take him out of position for the next shot.Once in the rally, the ball control player has a 2-1 advantage over the basher. He wins most of the points when he has the initiative, as does the attacker. But when neither has the initiative, guess who has the advantage? The ball control player, who has successfully taken away the basher's attack, thereby bringing him down a level.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1716title: January 27, 2014 - Practicing Serves the Productive Waydate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:It's almost a cliché. I hand someone a box of balls to practice their serves. They grab a ball and serve, grab a ball and serve, grab a ball and serve, and so on, all done with the speed and thoughtfulness of firing a machine gun. Then they wonder why their serves aren't any good. There's a lot more to developing great serves than rapid-fire serve practice, where the goal seems to be to empty the box of balls as rapidly as possible. So what should you do differently?First and foremost, learn the proper way to execute great serves. You can do this by watching players with great serves, or a coach or top player can show you. It's pointless to practice your serves if you don't know how to do them properly.Once you have at least some idea of what you need to practice, get that box of balls and go to the table. It's generally best done alone; having someone return your serve can be a distraction, especially when you are learning a new serve. (But sometimes you want someone to return your serves, so you can get feedback, and to see how much difficulty they have.)Grab a ball and get ready to start. You might want to first hold a ball in your fingers (tightly) and practice the actual contact you are going to make with the ball. (But don't rub the sponge into the held ball too hard or you'll damage your sponge.)Now go into your serving position, and come to a complete stop. The rules actually state that you must start the serve with the ball resting freely on the palm of yourstationaryfree hand--but there's a more important reason to do this than complying with the rules.This is where you visualize the serve in your head. Don't just grab a ball and mechanically serve it; from now on, never serve a ball without first seeing it done exactly as you want it done, in your head. This is what the top players do. Visualization is one of the best tools in sports, and for serving, it's especially good since there are no outside influences--it's just you and the ball. In your head, see how you swing at the ball, the contact, and the entire trajectory of the serve as you want it.After you've visualized the serve in your head, go ahead and serve. Don't try to guide it; let the subconscious take over. (You should do this for all table tennis shots.) Let go; you're just an observer. Watch the ball as it leaves your racket. Did it bounce on each side of the table at the spot as you visualized? Did it bounce low to the net as you visualized? Did it go at the speed you visualized? Did it have the spin you visualized? Did it go short or long as you visualized? Am I emphasizing the wordvisualizeenough for you to make clear its importance?Now visualize the next serve, making corrections for what went wrong in the previous one, and emphasizing the aspects that went right. You are now well on your way to developing great serves. You should also be tired and sweaty pretty soon--serving is a very physical motion. You can't make the ball spin at extremely high speeds if you can't get your racket moving at extremely high speeds, like a whip.Does any of this sound boring? It shouldn't. If you just grab a ball and serve, grab a ball and serve, grab a ball and serve, that's like working an assembly line at a factory.That's boring.But serving is the trick part of table tennis, and practicing your serves, and all the tricky, deceptive things you can do with them, while revving up and varying the spin, is like practicing a magic trick. That's not boring, and neither should practicing serves.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1710title: January 20, 2014 - Playing Against the Seemiller or American Gripdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:(This is an excerpt from "Table Tennis Tactics for Thinkers.")This grip was named for and popularized by five-time U.S. Men’s Singles Champion Dan Seemiller, who was ranked in the top thirty in the world in the late 1970s. He was followed by Eric Boggan, who reached top twenty in the world. No other U.S.-trained player has come close to these rankings in the sponge era (since the 1950s). Four of the five U.S. team members at the 1983 World Championships used this grip - Dan Seemiller, his brother Rick Seemiller, Eric Boggan, and 1983 Pan Am Men’s Singles Gold Medalist Brian Masters. (All four are in the U.S. Table Tennis Hall of Fame.) The grip is sometimes called the American grip, but is more commonly called the Seemiller grip. (Here's a videoof Dan Seemiller, the lefty, in the final of the 1989 LA. Open.)The grip is sort of a variation of the shakehands grip, with the top of the racket rotated to the left so that the index finger curls around the side of the racket. The forehand is played about the same, but on the backhand the arm rotates about so that the same side is used on the forehand and backhand. Despite its promising start, the grip never came close to the popularity of shakehands or penhold, and in recent years fewer and fewer players use the grip. However, you will face these players in tournaments (especially in the northeast U.S.) and need to be ready.Like shakehands and penhold, the Seemiller grip also has its backhand and forehand variations, except here it is more extreme. If the top of the racket is rotated to the left, it is a backhand grip, as used by Eric Boggan and Brian Masters, which weakens the forehand loop. If the racket is rotated to the right (almost becoming a regular shakehands grip), it is a forehand grip, as used by Dan and Rick Seemiller, which weakens the backhand.The Seemiller grip has four major advantages. It is probably the best grip for blocking, especially on the backhand. There is very little weakness in the middle - in fact, the grip is at its best there. It gives a very natural wrist snap on forehand loops against backspin. And since only one side of the racket is used, and because the racket is easy to flip with this grip, it allows a player to have an off-surface on selected shots, usually antispin, though some use long pips. A player with this grip can flip to use that side as a variation, and then flip back to the regular surface, usually inverted. (All four of the U.S. team members mentioned above used antispin on the reverse side, inverted on the other.)The disadvantages are that the wrist can make it difficult to play the corners (and so players with this grip often have trouble with players who play to the wide corners); it limits the backhand mostly to close-to-the-table blocking and hitting, with a very limited backhand loop; and it can be difficult to counterloop with this grip.Because of the lack of a strong backhand loop, deep serves and pushes to the backhand can give this grip problems, unless the player has very fast footwork and can play the forehand from the backhand over and over. (Others, like Eric Boggan, learned to hit backspin serves with his antispin side, and then flipped back to inverted for the next shot.)Some players with the Seemiller grip can be absolute walls on the backhand, and it makes no sense trying to overpower that side - but if you attack the forehand side first (and perhaps force them a step off the table) and then come back to the backhand, then the backhand wall might crumble. The grip is weaker from off the table, and like most shots, is less consistent when you have to move.Most players with the Seemiller grip use the off surface to return serves, especially short ones. Some have the ability to quickly judge the depth of the incoming serve, and use anti against short serves, inverted to loop or otherwise attack long serves. If they use the anti to return most serves, serve deep, and you should get a relatively weak return or an erratic anti attack. Often a deep serve to the forehand is especially effective. If they try to flip the racket based on the depth of your serve, mix in short spinny serves and fast, long serves, and watch them struggle to flip their racket appropriately - it’s not easy! It is very important not to telegraph your serves - players like this are very good at picking up small cues, so try to use the exact same motion for both short and long serves, at least until contact.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1705title: January 13, 2014 - Maximum Power and Controldate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:How do you get maximum power on your shots? Many players at the beginning/intermediate levels might say "swing hard!" But that's the worst thing you can do. Until your muscles are trained properly, swinging hard means spastically using a few muscles but not all of them. It also means putting less weight into the shot. Both cases result in either wimpy shots that any well-trained kid would laugh at, or sometimes powerful shots with no control.Watch a baseball pitcher with a good fastball. (You can find many at Youtube.com) Many of them can break 100mph, and nearly all are in the 90s. Watch these flamethrowers; are they swinging hard, or are they swingingsmart? I think you can see the answer; the most powerful throwers don't seem to put full effort into their pitch; in fact, their throws seem effortless. And they're able to hit a rather small target from over 60 feet away.Now watch the top table tennis players, and you'll see the same. The shots of the most powerful players often seem effortless. Meanwhile, watch some intermediate players as they swing as hard as they can, usually with less power and always with less consistency. Many spastically use one or two muscles at full power while losing the power of everything else, including their body weight rotating into the shot. Their shots spray all over the court as you cannot control a muscle spastically contracting at full power.A key here is that these baseball pitchers and table tennis players not only have power, but they have control. How do they do it? The secret is they use their full bodies in a fluid motion that rotates everything smoothly into the shot, leading to power and control. It starts from the legs, then the hips, then the waist, then the shoulders, then the arm, and finally the wrist, which effortlessly snaps into the ball like the tip of a whip. All these muscles are engaged as the player accelerates into the shot, creating the seemingly effortless power of a pitcher or top table tennis player.It is the addition of all these smooth muscle contractions and rotations, in the proper sequence (from bottom to top, and roughly from big muscles to small) that gives great power and control. So here's a good rule: never swing at 100%. Swing smoothly, using the full body, at perhaps 70-80% full power, and watch the power and control shot way up.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1701title: January 6, 2014 - Three Parts to a Swingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Backswing, forward swing . . . backswing, forward swing . . . backswing, forward swing . . . when hitting forehand to forehand or backhand to backhand, how many of you get into this pattern, whether hitting or looping? The problem is you are doing something you should never do in a match, so why would you want to practice it? There arethreeparts to a swing: Backswing, forward swing, and the often forgotten return to ready position. A player would almost never go directly from his follow through to backswinging.Beginners and even relatively advanced players often warm up and practice as if there were only two parts to the swing, and it often costs them when it becomes habit. Often in real rallies they are set only for forehand or backhand, not both, because of this lack of return to ready position. If they don't do it in practice, why would they do it in a match? In reality, these players do tend to sort of return to ready after each shot, but either more slowly or not all the way, and so they often aren't ready for the next shot. For example, they'll hit or loop a backhand, and automatically bring their racket back after the follow through as if they were going to play another backhand, when of course they might be playing a forehand. And vice versa for forehands.Instead, make a practice of returning to ready after each shot when practicing. On both forehands and backhands, this basically means the racket goes through a triangle, starting from the ready position: Backswing (bring racket back); forward swing (bring racket forward and up), and return to ready position (racket drops down and back to where it started, ready for the next shot). Usually these are essentially continuous, so there might not be any stop at the ready position; you go straight through the triangle, with the move to the ready position essentially the first half of the backswing, though it could continue into a backswing for either forehand or backhand. So drop the linear strokes and learn the triangle!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1694title: December 30, 2013 - Do Something Differentdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:These days it seems like everyone's trying to be like everyone else. That's a pretty successful way of getting good, if you copy the top players. But many are missing the benefits of doing something different. Give your opponent a different look, at least on some shots, and guess what? He might begin to struggle. This doesn't mean changing your whole game to some unorthodox mess; it means developing certain "pet shots" that are different than the norm. They give you more variation on certain shots than if you only have "orthodox" shots.For example, a few years ago penholder Wang Hao and shakehanders Ma Long and Zhang Jike, all from China, showed up on the world scene flipping short serves to their forehands with their backhands (with banana flips, i.e. mini backhand loops over the table with topspin and sidespin), and all three reached #1 in the world. Few had done this before, and now seemingly everyone at the higher levels is doing it. Or check out videos of Dimitrij Ovtcharov of Germany, world #6 and the #1 European, and his unorthodox backhand serve from the middle of the table. Or former world #1 Timo Boll, also of Germany, who often switches to a forehand grip for looping with extreme inside-out sidespin loops.Some, of course, naturally do something different, by having a non-inverted surface, a different grip (Seemiller grip, or even penhold grip for some, since many aren't used to playing that), an unorthodox stroke (not usually good unless it's just as a variation), or even something as simple as being left-handed. But for most players, you'll want to do something "different" while sticking to your normal shakehands inverted on both sides game. And there are lots of ways. Below are ten examples - and I do all of these on occasion, though less now than when I was an active tournament player and honed these variations by actually using them regularly. Pick out one or two, and give them a try!Serve from forehand side. Nearly everyone serves from the backhand corner these days, with a few tomahawk serves from the forehand. Throw in a few forehand pendulum or backhand serves from the forehand side. The surprise factor will often make up for your starting a bit out of position.Serve short sidespin to the forehand. So many players serve over and Over and OVER to the middle and backhand it's almost silly, and when they do serve short to the forehand, it's a simple backspin ball. Instead, learn to serve short to the forehand with sidespin that pulls the ball toward your forehand, making it awkward for the opponent to return the ball down the line. You can do this with a backhand serve, a reverse pendulum serve, or a forehand tomahawk serve. Or do it with a regular forehand pendulum serve.Slow, spinny loop. Most people these days loop either hard or harder. Try letting the ball drop a bit more, and go for a super-spinny slow one. If it goes deep, it'll drive blockers crazy. If it lands short, it'll drive counter-loopers crazy.Dead loop. Fake spin, and instead give a dead loop. You sell this by using an exaggerated follow-through rightaftercontact (including a big wrist snap), making it seem spinny.Dead push. Push without spin, but with an exaggerated follow through to fake spin.Sidespin push. Come across the ball as you push. This is especially easy on the backhand, with a right-to-left motion (for righties), with the ball breaking to the right. It's especially effective wide to the right, breaking into a righty's opponent's backhand.Ginzo push. Most players push to keep the ball in play. Throw in a few super-ginzo (i.e. extremely heavy) pushes, and watch opponents struggle. It's easier if you take the ball a little later for this, but advanced players can do this quick off the bounce.Dead block. Block it dead, chop block, sidespin block - these will frustrate many opponents and set you up for a conventional attack. They are especially effective and easy on the backhand side.Countering change-of-pace. Rather than bang every ball in a fast counter-hitting rally, sometimes hit one soft. Either keep it low and short to the net, or deep on the table.Flatter flip. Most players flip short balls with topspin. (It's called a flick in Europe.) Sometimes try a flatter one. Hit it a bit softer since you don't have topspin to pull it down, but not too soft. (Recently I've seen a number of top players experimenting with this variation.)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1690title: December 23, 2013 - Returning Hidden and Other Tricky Spin Servesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:What can a player do if he is having trouble reading the spin on the opponent's serve? At the lower levels, this usually means the opponent's serving motion is too quick for the player to pick up contact. At the higher levels, it's often because the opponent is hiding his serve, a serious problem since many umpires do not enforce the serving rules and allow players to illegally hide contact, making it difficult to read the spin on the ball. However, the techniques for returning these hidden serves are essentially the same for those at lower levels who struggle to read the spin off any serve. So what can you do when you have trouble reading the spin, whether against a good server or against an illegally hidden one?Before hidden serves became illegal, players at higher levels learned to read the spin from watching the ball itself, and how it moved through the air and bounced on the table. But since it became illegal to hide contact, this became almost a lost art. And yet it's something players need to learn or they'll have great difficulty in many matches. Here are ten tips on how to do so.Don't do too much. Accept that if you can't read the spin off the serve quickly as the ball leaves the opponent's racket, you are not going to consistently make strong returns. Instead, your goal is to make consistent controlled and well-placed returns. (Actually, that should be the primary goal even if you read the spin.)Take the ball as late as you can. This gives you more time to react to the spin. Most often players do read the spin of a serve, even if it's hidden, they just don't read it quickly enough to react. The more time you have to read it, the better.Assume the serve is topspin or sidespin until you see otherwise.Even if you don't read them immediately, backspin serves are much easier to adjust to at the last second than topspin and sidespin serves. Backspin serves are almost always slower and they slow down even more as they hit the table, and you can just push or softly loop or roll them back. Topspin and sidespin serves jump as they hit the table making it difficult to react at the last second, and if you push them, they shoot off the end or side of the table. So you should generally assume the serve has topspin or sidespin and aim low with a controlled forehand or backhand drive, or possibly by chopping. If it's backspin, you can make a last-second adjustment much more easily than against topspin or sidespin.Return the ball softly but with placement and depth. Generally keep it wide and deep to the server's weaker side, usually the backhand. Make him move way over to this backhand side if he wants to use his forehand, and then you can block back to his open forehand side. Or go to the wide forehand to draw the opponent there, then block back to his open backhand side. Depth is extremely important; a soft return that goes deep can be effective. A soft return that lands in the middle of the table (depth-wise) will usually get hammered.Read the spin by the way it moves through the air. A topspin ball drops quickly, a backspin serve floats, and a sidespin serve curves sideways. The differences are subtle but you should be able to pick up the differences.Read the spin by the way it bounces on the table. A topspin ball jumps at you, a sidespin ball curves sideways, and a backspin ball slows down.Read the spin from the label. This is tricky, and it's doubtful one can really read the spin this way if the ball is spinning rapidly. But some claim they can do so, even at higher levels. At lower levels, where there's less spin, you can pick it up. Also, this allows you to read no-spin serves, where you should be able to see the label.Read the spin based on past serves. If you keep pushing serves that look like backspin but are actually topspin or sidespin and so they keep going off the end or side of the table, perhaps the next time you see that serve that looks like backspin you should accept that it's topspin or sidespin.Treat topspin and sidespin almost the same. If you use a regular drive stroke, the spin won't take on your racket that much. As long as you give yourself some margin for error by not being too aggressive, you can treat them almost the same. Your return off a topspin serve might go a little deeper, and off a sidespin serve a little more sideways, but not as much as you'd think. When your returns go shooting off the end or side it's usually because you are pushing topspin or sidespin serves.React to no-spin serves. A no-spin serve that looks spinny is usually more effective than a spinny serves that looks spinny. You can read them using the methods above, except that with no spin, there's no curving in the air or change in the bounce on the table, and you can see the label. Against a no-spin serve, you can use almost any stroke, but adjust to the lack of spin. Often players push these serves high since they are used to pushing against backspin, or they drive them into the net since they are used to driving against topspin.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1684title: December 9, 2013 - Learn Tactics by Coaching Othersdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the best ways to learn tactics is to coach others during matches. It's a different vantage point that forces you to really open your mind to tactics going on in a match where you aren't playing, both tactics that are being used and ones that are not. It's especially helpful when coaching players near your own level, but you can learn a surprising amount even coaching much lower-level players. And if you happen to be coaching a stronger player, well, there's a lot you can learn there if you are striving to reach that level. Here are two ways you can learn by coaching others:First, when you just watch others play, you aren't forced to really analyze what's going on. Sure, in theory you can, but do youreally? Most just watch the rallies. However, if you are coaching one of the players and are going to coach them between games, you suddenly have strong incentive to watch closely and analyze what's really going on. And from this, you can learn from both the player you are coaching and his opponent. You may be surprised at how much is going on out there, both intentionally by smart players, and stuff the players at the table don't see but that you do, now that you are paying attention - and you can learn from this. What you learn by coaching a player not only helps that player, but helps you as well.Second, it's easy for a player to get stuck in his own little tactical fishbowl, doing the same things over and Over and OVER, never realizing there's a lot more he could be doing. There are literally zillions of tactics out there, and while you aren't going to use most of them, you should be ready to use many, depending on your opponent. You need to be out there seeing what others are doing so you can pick up on some of these tactics. You won't do this by just doing the same tactics you are used to over and over; you have to get out of your fishbowl and see what others are doing.A corollary to this is that if you are stuck in this tactical fishbowl (often without realizing it), others on the outside can see what you are doing, and a good coach or experienced player might be able to help. So it works both ways - you can learn by coaching, but you can also learn by someone else coaching you - and if the latter, he learns by coaching you! Call it the "Circle of Coaching."===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1679title: December 3, 2013 - Use a Wider Stancedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the quickest ways to tell the difference between a world-class player and a typical club player is to compare how far their feet are apart. Top players almost always have wider stances than average players. Just go to youtube and watch videos of the best players and the difference becomes obvious. The wider stance can be tricky to learn, and if you have knee problems, weak legs, or are overweight, it may not work for you. But for most players, the wider stance is a big advantage.First, it allows you to keep your balance when moving and when making powerful shots. Table tennis is all about balance; if you are even slightly off balance it affects both your shot and (often more importantly) your recovery for the next shot. When you go for a big forehand, the wider stance keeps you balanced and stable.Second, it increases your power. The wider stance allows you to put more weight into the shot since there’s a longer transfer period as weight goes from the back leg to the front leg. (This is especially true for forehand shots, but is also true for most backhand loops.) With a more narrow stance, you can only transfer the weight a short distance, and so you get less power. It’s like comparing a baseball pitcher with a long windup to one who tries to flick the ball with a short backswing – the longer windup will give more power.Third, it allows you to move more quickly. This is both because your center of gravity is lower, allowing a quicker start, and because the wider stance gives more leverage.The downside is it takes time to learn, and is also more tiring. But the payoff is worth it. So give it a try. It’ll seem different at first, and perhaps not comfortable. You might experiment by exaggerating it sometimes so that a more normal wide stance will seem more natural.So consider widening your stance, and watch the improvement in your balance, power, and quickness.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1674title: November 25, 2013 - Mentality in a Match and in Practicedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:This could be a very short Tip, since the mentality in a match and in practice should be the same. So here's the short version: think of a time when you played GREAT. It could be in a tournament or a practice match, or even a practice session. The key is that you played great, and want to play like that all the time. Now think about your mentality when you were playing great, i.e. were "in the zone." You were probably playing almost mindlessly, other than tactical thinking. In fact, you probably were more like a spectator just watching yourself react mindlessly and almost flawlessly. THAT is the mentality you want both when you practice and when you play a match.So how do you do it? Many think that they only need to reach this state of being in the zone when they are playing serious matches. But that's like saying you only need to have a good forehand in serious matches, and so can goof off when practicing and in less serious matches. Just as you need to develop your forehand in practice and in practice matches, you need to develop this ability to get into the zone by practicing it - and that means doing so whenever you play until it becomes second nature. It is only then that you'll be able to turn it on at will in big matches, because it will then, in fact, be second nature, and just like your other best techniques. Think of getting in the zone as no different than hitting a good forehand. Both are techniques that take practice, and if you want them to be ready in serious matches, you need to practice them . . . in practice.How do you get into the zone? Basically you have to just let go and let your subconscious take control. When someone loops to you and you block, you don't consciously set the racket angle; your subconscious does this, as well as just about everything else you do when rallying. When you practice, you are basically training the subconscious to play, i.e. setting muscle memory so that it'll react properly in a match. It's not a static thing; if your opponent does something different that you haven't practiced against, your subconscious will learn and adjust. The key in all cases is to let it do so, since the subconscious is quicker and more accurate than anything you can do consciously. If your conscious interferes by trying to guide your shots, your game will deteriorate. Other than thinking tactics - which the subconscious will pick up on and follow - think of yourself as a spectator and just admire your play. Heck, I sometimes feel guilty when I'm playing well since I feel like I'm not really doing anything other than watching as that subconscious part of me takes control. (But remember - the conscious mind has its role as the tactical leader that the subconscious will follow if you allow it. And yet, even there the subconscious will end up doing most of your tactical work since it will learn to automatically do the right tactical thing. It's smarter than you think!)Putting aside physical limitations, there's no reason why a player can't be at his best essentially all the time - it's all in the head. When players realize this, as most do after they've played many years, their game goes up dramatically. Do you want to wait many years or learn this now?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1667title: November 18, 2013 - Three Reasons Players Miss Against Deep Sidespin and Topspin Servesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:At the elite levels, deep sidespin and topspin serves mostly get looped, and are mostly used as occasional variations. But at lower levels they are often the bane of players who hit or loop them off the end over and over. Why do they do this? There are three main reasons.First, they do not adjust to the amount of spin on the ball. A ball with topspin or sidespin is going to jump off your paddle faster than a ball that is not spinning, and you have to take that into account. If you don't, the ball will take off faster (and higher against a topspin) than expected, and so go off the end. So you must aim lower. (Note that while sidespin pulls the ball sideways, players who hit or loop the serve don't usually miss against these serves by going off the side since the spin takes less on their paddle when they attack the ball, and so it'll only go a few inches more to the side than expected.)Second, they do not take into account that their contact point is usually closer to the table than in a rally. This is especially true for loopers. For example, against a block, a player may loop from several feet behind the table. But against a topspin or sidespin serve, the contact point is generally 1-3 feet closer to the table. This means that the far end of the table is 1-3 feet closer to you, and so you must aim lower or you will go off the end.Third, they lift breaking sidespin serves off the end. This is especially true against ones that break away from the player. The reason is that they may hold his racket at the perfect height to return the serve - but then see the ball breaking away, and reach for it. When reaching, players generally lower their racket - and so they lift more, and go off the end. So make sure to keep your racket at the height you want to start the stroke - but even more important, learn to read the break of the serve so you don't have to make last-second lunges.A solution to all three of these problems is to contact the ball more on top of the ball, especially when looping. There should be little lift.How can you overcome these and other bad habits in returning these and other serves? PRACTICE!!! Instead of just practicing rally shots all the time, you and your partner should take turns serving to each other. You could play out the point, but it's even better to just get a bucket of balls and one player serves over and over while the other just receives. The server doesn't play the point out; as soon as he serves, he reaches for the next ball to serve. This gives you a lot more receive practice per time then playing out the point. Have the server give you the same serve over and over until you are comfortable with it, and then move on to another. When you are fairly comfortable against most of the serves you may face, then have the server vary them so you learn to adjust to each one. And remember - you don't have to kill or loop kill the serve. When returning serves, consistency, control, depth, and placement are king.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1662title: November 12, 2013 - Pushing Shortdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the trickier things in table tennis starting at the intermediate level is how to return short backspin serves without giving the server an easy ball to loop. The easiest return is a long push, but then the server gets to loop. You can also flip the short serve, but that can be tricky, and many servers can loop that return as well unless you flip very aggressively - and if you do that, you lose consistency. So what to do?The answer is often to push short and low. A short push is a push that, given the chance, would bounce twice on the other side of the table. This makes it almost impossible to loop. As long as you keep it low, and don't telegraph the shot in advance, the server will have to move in at the last second and make a hurried return. As long as the ball is low and short, it's unlikely he'll be able to attack it effectively. It's primarily used to return short serves, but if the opponent pushes short (perhaps against your serve), you can also push it back short to stop his attack. At higher levels players sometimes push short back and forth two or three times as they look for a ball to attack.The keys to a good short push are a light touch and a skimming contact to create backspin. Many players try to push short by meeting the ball almost straight on, with little backspin, and rely on the light touch to keep it low and short - but that's very difficult to control. When you meet the ball straight on without any skimming motion the ball will tend to bounce out more. Instead, take the ball right off the bounce (when it's low and close to the net), chop down on it lightly as you graze the ball. The grazing motion will lighten the touch and make it easy to keep the ball low, as well as help keep the ball short. The backspin will also make it trickier to attack.When stepping in to push short, make sure to get close to the table by stepping under the table with your right foot (for righties). Keep your free hand up for balance. (These last two items are important against all short balls, whether you are pushing or flipping.)One of the problems with pushing short is that it's so easy to misread the serve and pop the ball up, giving the server an easy put-away. (Players usually have more control when pushing long.) This especially happens against balls that appear to have backspin but instead are no-spin, sidespin, or just light backspin. (To keep these returns low you have to chop down on the ball - i.e. aim lower.) The reality is that pushing short isn't really a high-percentage shot until you approach the more advanced levels where you read spins well and have good ball control - roughly a 2000 level in USATT ratings. But if you wait until you are 2000 before you start working on this, you'll be years behind your competition. (One solution is to use the short push mostly against players with easy-to-read and predictable short serves, but not against players with trickier serves, at least in serious matches and until you improve your pushing touch.)At the advanced levels, you can add more finesse to your short push. The simplest short push is to aim it straight back at the net, where the net is closest, so your return is perpendicular to the net. But you can also angle it to the side. Better still, aim one way, and then at the last second go the other way to really mess up an opponent. Pushing short to a corner, especially the wide forehand, can be awkward for the opponent to get to, but does give them a wide angle to attack into. So sometimes it's best to push short to the middle to cut off the wide angles. It depends on the opponent. Make sure that your shot looks the same until the last second whether you are pushing long or short.Now we're going to get into something that's seemingly a bit more complicated, but is really quite simple once you get used to it. It's something many top players do subconsciously without even realizing they are doing it. (Skip this paragraph if it starts to give you a headache.) Imagine a straight backspin serve. If you push it back, you meet the backspin straight on, and the incoming backspin rebounds off your racket with outgoing backspin, the easiest way to push. Now imagine the server serves a forehand pendulum serve with sidespin-backspin to your backhand. (Assume both players are righties.) If you push it back normally with your backhand, the ball will jump a bit to the right when you contact it. Suppose you instead drop the racket tip a bit, thereby compensating by aiming the racket a bit to the left. Now you'll have more control in placing the ball where you aim it. If you think about it, by dropping the racket tip you'll now be meeting the incoming spin head-on, exactly as if you were pushing against a backspin. This gives maximum control. You might find it easier to drop this type of serve short to the forehand (i.e. to the left). If the server serves a backhand sidespin-backspin serve, you might raise the racket tip to compensate. You might find it easier to drop this serve short to the backhand. (The same thing applies on serves short to the forehand - raise or drop the tip based on the incoming sidespin.)Adding a short push to your receive repertoire is a valuable tool, and combined with a good long push and a consistent, well-placed flip, will allow you to dominate even when receiving.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1655title: November 4, 2013 - Tournament Toughnessdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Playing in tournaments is quite different from playing practice matches. Here are three reasons for this. First, the playing conditions are generally different than you are used to - different tables, balls, floors, backgrounds, and lighting. Second, you are usually playing different players, while in practice you often play the same players over and over. And third, there's far more pressure in a tournament match than in a practice match. (There are other, lesser reasons - traveling, time zone changes, eating different foods, etc.)To overcome these three hurdles a player needs to become "Tournament Tough." How do you do this? By playing in tournaments!By playing lots of tournaments you get used to different playing conditions, different opponents, and the pressures of tournament play. In fact, players who are tournament tough often play better in tournaments - they rise to the occasion, and play their best play, while not-so-tournament-tough opponents do not, and the contrast is often pretty blatant. How many players have you seen beat everyone in practice, but turn around and lose in tournaments? It's not the exception; it's the norm.There are ways you can help develop your tournament toughness outside of tournaments. First, you can choose tournaments with varied conditions so you can get used to playing in any conditions. If you play in a club with perfect conditions, and only play there, then you'll be fine in tournaments with perfect conditions. In the large majority of major tournaments you'll have a problem as perfect conditions aren't so common. So get used to playing on slippery floors, poor lighting, distracting backgrounds, and tables and balls that might not meet your approval.Play lots of different players in practice so you'll be ready for lots of different players in tournaments. Often the best thing you can do is play practice matches with weaker players with weird styles - not so you can learn to play that specific weird style, but to learn to adjust to different styles.Finally, we get to tournament pressure. There simply isn't anything in practice like it. You'll feel it early in the tournament, and it'll only get worse as you reach the final rounds of an event you badly want to win.I once coached a kid in the final of an age event at the Junior Nationals. (I think it was Under 12.) The kid had been training for years and was one of the top two players of his age in the country. But before the final he was incredibly nervous. I asked why, and he said it was the first time in his life he'd been in a final. How had this happened? He and his parents had always kept him out of rating and age events where he was a top seed to protect his rating, and so he had never really played in events where he was competitive, and so never was in a final. They only wanted him to play stronger players. And so he was a nervous wreck, and got clobbered in the final against a player he might have beaten - in a practice match. But he didn't have the "tournament toughness" to win a big match.What can you learn from this? You need to play competitive events and learn how towinevents. This means playing in age and rating events where you are among the top seeds.This brings up a question that's been raised a lot over the years. Should under-rated players play in rating events they are eligible for, even if they are better than the cut-off? Definitely. It is irrelevant if you think your level of play is over the rating cutoff. At the U.S. Open, U.S. Nationals, or other large tournaments, you have to play a lot better than the rating cutoff to win, so usually being a lot better than the rating cutoff merely makes you competitive. Plus, who are you to say your level is better than the cutoff until you have proved so in a tournament? And finally, you need the competition. How can you be at your best in a big match until you have this big match experience? How can you get this big match experience if you avoid events where you can reach the finals?When a player trains very hard and improves a lot, he should have that one opportunity to win those events that he was struggling to win before. When he's finally reached the point where he's good enough to win the event, he should play the event, reap the reward for his hard work, and from battling through to win the event, gain the tournament toughness needed to win in ever higher events.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1651title: October 29, 2013 - Start Drills with a Servedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most players practice with drills that are very different from what they actually do in a match. There's a logic to this - you want to perfect each part of your game, and you do that by isolating the shot so you can do it repeatedly, something you can't do nearly as effectively in a game situation. For example, if you want to be able to loop over and over against a block in a match, you first should practice looping over and over against a block in practice against a ball blocked to the same spot, which doesn't happen often in a match. However, there's a time for isolating a shot to perfect it, and a time to match game situations.After doing these simple rote drills, many players go either to random drills (such as the ball blocked randomly to all or certain parts of the table) or match-type drills (such as serve and attack). These are also good drills. But you also want to learn to connect how a rally really starts in a match (with a serve and receive) and how you'd follow it up, with an emphasis on doing so repeatedly so you can develop the techniques.An example of a drill for this is one player serves backspin; the receiver pushes back long (usually to a pre-set spot); the server loops off the backspin to a pre-set spot, and then the rally continues with the server looping over and over off the block. The blocks can go to one spot, go side to side, or be randomly placed. A drill like this allows the server to combine looping off backspin with repeated loops against block, which is what often happens in a match.A hitter (or a counter-driver or blocker, who still have to hit in rallies) could do a version of this where, after the opening loop against backspin (which even hitters, counter-drivers, and blockers should learn to do), he follows with hitting instead of looping. (In the modern game, nearly everyone at the higher levels learns to loop in rallies, but not everyone.)A chopper/attacker could do the same drill, looping or hitting the forehand over and over, except the receiver's goal is to block him out of position and force him to chop with his backhand. After that it could be free play.Drills like these are not just for the server; the receiver is also practicing his receives and his blocks, or whatever else he is doing in the drill. Some drills should center around the receiver, who perhaps receives and attacks the next ball in a pre-set pattern.The drills don't have to all start with a serve and a long push return. You can do drills where the receiver pushes short over and over (and server flips, or perhaps pushes short again and loops the receiver's next long push) or flips the serve over and over (to one spot or varied spots). Or the server can serve long, the receiver attacks, and the server counter-attacks.So come up with your own drills where you do a drill that allows you to develop a shot repeatedly but in a more match-like situation by starting the rally with a serve and receive.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1643title: October 21, 2013 - Should You Choose Serve, Receive, or Side at the Start of a Match?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The time when a player is most likely to miss easy shots is at the very start of the match. That’s when a player may not yet be fully warmed up or used to his opponent’s shots yet. So it’s often best to let the other guy serve first, let him mess up on his serve & attack at the start, and then get your chance to serve, when you are more into the match.There’s another, more mathematical way of looking at this. Suppose in a given match, the server will score 60% of the points. (In reality, it not that high in competition matches—more like 55% or so.) So you figure every time you serve a point, you should score an average of 0.6 points. That means if you mess up on your serve and lose two in a row because you aren’t yet warmed up, you’ve mathematically lost 2 x 0.6 points, or 1.2 points. If you do so when receiving, you’ve only lost 2 x 0.4 points, or 0.8 points. In other words, you can more easily afford to lose a point on the other guy’s serve than on your own—so let him serve when he’s not warmed up, and put off your own serving until you are slightly more warmed up.The exception, of course, is the player who needs to get a quick lead to build up confidence. If you lose confidence when you fall behind and don’t play as well, then by all means serve first. But in this case, you need to work on your mental game.Addendum (not in the book): What about choice of sides? At the start of a match, whoever wins the coin flip (or the hiding of the ball under the table) gets choice of serving, receiving, or side to start on. (You change sides after each game, and as soon as someone scores five points in the last, deciding game if it goes that far.) What if on one side it's harder to see the ball (because of the background), or the floor is slippery on that side, or something like that? There are two ways of looking at this.A close match will go into the final game. In that final game you'll switch sides as soon as someone reaches five points. But that means that you'll likely play more points after switching sides. If you switch sides at 5-4 and the game goes to 10-10, at that point you'd have played nine points on the bad side, eleven on the good side - plus you'll be on the good side for the points at deuce. (If you switch sides at 5-3 then it's twelve on the good side, eight on the bad side.) So if you choose the bad side at the start, you'll start the fifth game on the bad side, and end up playing more points on the good side.However, some find it harder to get into a match if they start on the bad side. So that player may want to start on the good side, so that when he does move to the bad side he'll be more into the match, and less likely to be bothered by the bad side.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1637title: October 14, 2013 - Playing Choppersdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:There is nothing more infuriating than losing to a patient chopper who lets you beat yourself with your own errors. Losing to a chopper is like four-putting in golf; you may have made some good drives to get to the green, but all you remember are the misses at the end. Rather than four-putting forever, let’s learn how to beat the chopper.A chopper is weakest in the middle, and that is where you should focus most of your attacks. However, you have more table (and so more margin for error) by going diagonally to a corner. Going for a winner down the line often catches the chopper by surprise. A chopper who is not particularly fast is vulnerable at the corners, especially if you aim one way and then go the other; a chopper with inverted on both sides is more vulnerable in the middle. Keep these “basics” in mind when playing any of the following styles.There are four general ways of playing a chopper. Informally they are called European style, Asian style, Pick-hitting, and Chiseling. While you should favor one of these styles, feel free to combine them in developing your own style against choppers.In all four cases, focus on attacking the middle, the weakest spot for nearly all choppers. This isimperativewhen playing choppers.European Style.The goal here is to bring the chopper in close to the table, and then attack hard, especially at the chopper’s middle. The chopper is too close to the table to make the return, and so misses. When using this technique, you should mostly serve short to bring the chopper in, and try to follow with a strong attack. Sometimes, however, fake the attack, and push short instead – the chopper, in his haste to back up for the expected attack, will have trouble with this ball, and will often have to make a last-second lunge to return it. Even if he makes the return (often a weak one), he will be left jammed over the table and vulnerable to the next ball, which you can promptly loop for a winner. If the chopper stays closer to the table to guard against this drop shot, then you attack. The chopper has absolutely no way of answering this ... in theory.During a rally, if the chopper makes a good return from away from the table, push short again, and start over. The object in a rally is to catch the chopper too far away from the table or moving backward so that you can drop the ball short, force him to rush in, and attack when he's jammed up against the table. Alternatively, you can push a few balls, keeping the chopper close to the table, and then attack when you think he’s not expecting it.Asian Style. The goal here is to control the spin and pace of the rally. This method is especially good against a long-pipped chopper, but takes regular practice against a chopper to learn to do effectively. Pips-out players are especially good at this style, but many good inverted players also play this way. This style doesn’t work well against an all-inverted chopper who chops very heavy. Let’s assume you are playing a long-pipped chopper.Here the aim is to get the chopper off the table, and then attack relatively softly over and over, into the long pips side, but not with full spin. The chopper can only return whatever spin you give him because of the long pips, and so their returns are not particularly heavy, making your continuous soft attack easy. After topspinning a few balls, you find one you like and loop or smash a winner.Depending on what you are more comfortable with, you can topspin many balls in a row before going for a winner, or only a few - be unpredictable. Mix in pushes. Some players just topspin over and over, not pushing or going for a winner unless they get a very easy one. You should try to vary your spin, sometimes looping very dead, sometimes spinny. However, beware of varying spin returns when you vary your own spin. For example, when you give heavy topspin, expect heavy chop, and so either lift the ball more on your next shot, or push and start over. Don’t fall into the trap of spinning heavily over and over – a chopper loves it, and all you’ll get are heavy chop returns, which can be very difficult to loop consistently.You can mix in pushing, but too much pushing will throw your own timing off. By topspinning over and over to the long pips side (but not with full spin), you can build up a rhythm that a chopper will have difficulty breaking.Try to get down to almost eye level with the ball by bending your knees. This will help your consistency by making the lifting easier and will get your eyes closer to the ball so you see it better.Pick-hitting Style. The goal here is to pick your shots against the chopper's push, and if you can't easily put away the return, push and patiently look for another ball to attack. Unless you have a put-away shot, you rarely attack two balls in a row. Instead it's push a few balls, attack, push a few balls, attack, push a few balls, attack, etc., until you get a putaway shot or the chopper misses. Most of the attacks should go to the chopper's weakest spot, usually the middle, sometimes the forehand. (The backhand chop, often with long pips, is usually a chopper's most consistent shot, but not always.) Most players attack by forehand looping, but you can also drive or smash, forehand or backhand.You need to vary your pushes to find a ball to attack. For example, a quick, off-the-bounce push to a chopper's long pips often forces a weak return, and any push with long pips has little spin, which you may be able to attack. A sudden push to the forehand can set up your own forehand attack. After a series of heavier pushes, a sudden no-spin or light backspin push can set up a higher return to attack.The advantage of this style is you don't have to deal with varying chop returns, which are where attackers make most of their mistakes. The disadvantage - besides the obvious patience needed and long rallies that you'll sometimes play - is that the chopper may start attacking. You have to find a balance. The more the chopper attacks effectively, the more you'll need to attack to stop that.Chiseling Style.I am not fond of this style. This basically means pushing with the chopper until the chopper either misses, pops up an easy one, or gets impatient and attacks too much. At the higher levels, chiseling is rare, but at the lower and medium levels, it is more common. Since I’m a strong believer that the game has to be FUN (it is a game!), I don’t like this way of winning. Unless you’re a chopper yourself (in which case SOMEONE’s got to push, and it might as well be you), I’d rather see a player lose by attacking in some way. You may lose now, but you’ll learn how to play a chopper better in future matches.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1631title: October 7, 2013 - Covering the Middle with the Forehanddate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the so-called axioms of table tennis is this: Against balls to your middle, if you are close to the table or rushed, favor your backhand; if you are not close to the table or have time, favor the forehand. It's a useful guideline for most players. (Note - a ball to the middle is a ball hit at the transition point between your forehand and backhand, usually the playing elbow.) However, if you have a strong forehand, you might want to cover the middle with it, even when rushed or close to the table. How do you do this? You have two options.Historically, the standard way was to step off the table to give yourself time to get into position for a forehand, and hit a late but strong forehand. This especially worked for loopers, who can use both spin and speed in powering a forehand loop from a few feet further back than usual. Hitters, however, had a problem with this as hitting the ball late made their shots a lot less effective than their usual hitting at the top of the bounce or earlier. So many hitters, especially pips-out penholders, developed techniques where they'd take the rushed forehand from the middle closer to the table by shortening their stroke, leaning to their left (for a righty), and rotating their upper torso backwards. They would also use this technique when stepping around their backhand to play a rushed forehand.Some loopers experimented with this, such as 1993 World Men's Singles Champion Jean-Phillipe Gatien, who was famous for looping from close to the table. Since then generations of world-class players have copied that, and many high-level matches become battles over who can loop from closer to the table. The first one that backs up gives the other player time to wind up as well as having more ground to cover. So these days many world-class players (including most of the best ones, pretty much all of them loopers) favor the same technique pioneered by hitters and then adopted by loopers such as Gatien, which is to simply shorten their swing and lean to the left (for righties) and rotate their upper torso to cover the middle with their forehand while staying close to the table. Like hitters, they also adopted this for when stepping around their backhand to play a rushed forehand.Here's a classic example of this technique, with Gatien himself. Go to the point starting 33 seconds in, and see Gatien's third shot, the forehand 36 seconds in. (Gatien's the lefty on the far side.) Most players, of course, will not do this with as much power as Gatien.This is also an example of where an old dog can learn new tricks - both older players reading this, and this coach as well. I don't know if I qualify as an "old dog" yet at 53, but it wasn't long ago that I was still coaching most players to take these middle balls farther off the table with their forehands. Now I teach both ways, but favor taking the ball quicker with a shorter stroke. Who did I learn this from? Another "old dog," 1971 World Champion Stellan Bengtsson, now a top U.S. coach.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1625title: September 30, 2013 - Mid-Match Technique Adjustmentsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the axioms of coaching is that you can't fix technique in the middle of a match. Whether coaching someone in a match, or trying to make adjustments yourself in a match, technique is something that needs to be honed in practice so it becomes automatic (i.e. subconscious) in an actual game. The reason for this is that the game is mostly played subconsciously. You don't consciously do technique very well in a game situation, or even choose the proper racket angle - your subconscious does all this after you've honed it in practice. There are just too many things to remember to do for one to do so consciously; the minute you take conscious control all that training is out the window. To fix something in mid-match means to consciously take control, and that rarely goes well.This is why the conscious mind's task during a match is mostly tactical - choosing what serves to use, how to receive, how to rally, etc. (And even there, much of it becomes subconscious - for example, when your conscious mind decides to attack deep serves, for this to work the subconscious has to get the message so it does so automatically.) The conscious mind should also focus on sports psychology - but that's basically techniques to get the conscious mind out of the way so the subconscious can take control.There are a few times when you can make basic fixes to stroking problems, though not necessarily technique problems. (I will write this as if I was coaching a player in a match, but you can do this yourself, i.e. coaching yourself in the same way.)Suppose your player lifts way too much when looping or smashing, and keeps going off the end. (There could be a dozen technical reasons for this; he might be standing up too straight, or using too much arm, or not transferring his weight forward, etc.) Trying to fix his technique directly probably won't work - that's something you'll have to do after the match, when you can zero in on the specific problem and drill the player to do it properly. So what can you do? Instead of trying to fix the technique, understand that the poor technique is putting the ball off the end when it aims for the table. So change the target; tell the player to aim for the top of the net. If the player makes a conscious decision to aim for this, and then lets the subconscious do this, it'll probably get the message and aim for the top of the net - and will likely do just what it was doing before, i.e. aiming too high, and so it'll instead go over the net and hit the table.Suppose your player has, say, a wristy forehand that causes him to lose control. Telling him to change his technique isn't going to help in that match; it'll just put him in the position of trying to learn a brand new technique, i.e. a wristless forehand he hasn't used before. His subconscious doesn't know what to do, and so you essentially turn the player into a beginner, at least with this one aspect. You could, of course, think of the match as just practice and have the player focus on the technique. Then it's not really a "match" so much as a practice session. But it's a highly inefficient practice session as the player will only haphazardly get to use the shot in question, and when it comes up, guess what? He'll reflexively do what his subconscious is used to doing, i.e. the poor technique. That's why to fix technique you have to practice it in a drill situation, where you do it over and Over and OVER until it is so honed that the subconscious can do it in a match. If it can't, then it'll fall back on old habits during the match, and re-enforce the bad habit.Suppose your player is standing up too straight, which leads to all sorts of technique problems, such as lifting too much when looping. If he's used to standing up straight all the time, there's not a lot you can do in the middle of a match. On the other hand, if the player sometimes stays low but other times (perhaps in the pressure of a match) stands up too straight, reminding him to stay low is a simple message that the subconscious can get since it's used to staying low, and it solves the technique problems.Sometimes it's not a technique problem so much as adjusting to something the subconscious hasn't seen before, and so isn't able to react properly. For example, suppose my player keeps blocking an opponent's slow, spinny loops off the end. The player hasn't seen such spinny loops before (at least not enough for the subconscious to learn what to do automatically), and so nearly every block goes off. I could tell him to close his racket angle - but that probably wouldn't work. In a game situation the subconscious automatically chooses the racket angle, and trying to adjust this against these super-spinny loops in the middle of a match is slow and difficult. If you tell your player to close the racket more, and he tries to do so consciously, he will likely lose what little control he had as his conscious mind can't reflexively do the proper angle in the split second it has to do so, and will tend to fall back on the reflexive angle that wasn't working before. So consciously telling oneself to close the racket more isn't really that helpful - the subconscious can see that it's blocking off the end, and is already trying to make adjustments (often too slowly) if you let it. (The more you play the easier these adjustments become.)However, if you tell the player to block more aggressively, then the spin won't take on the paddle as much, and the player won't be as susceptible to heavy topspin as before. It's a simple message to the subconscious - "block harder!" - and as long as it's not overdone ("harder" doesn't mean "smash"), it will often solve the problem.Here's my recommendation: focus on developing proper technique in practice, not in matches. Work with a coach or top player if possible, or watch videos. Get the technique down before using it in serious matches. It's okay if you don't yet have the timing for the techniques as long as you are doing it mostly properly. Matches are a great way to learn, but they are not the place to develop technique.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1619title: September 23, 2013 - Saturation Trainingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Everyone has a weakness in their game or a shot they'd like to perfect. How do players go about addressing these problems? Usually in haphazard fashion. They'll either try to work on it in actual matches, or they'll work on it some in practice, along with everything else. The result is usually a little improvement, which often convinces them they are on the right track. And so they progress very slowly. But it can be done much quicker with a little "saturation training."What this means is that for a time you should focus almost entirely on whatever it is you are trying to improve. It means devoting both practice time and match play to the single-minded goal of improving a weakness or perfecting a strength. You can still practice other things, but during the time of saturation training this should be kept to a minimum, and mostly to maintain other aspects of your game. The saturation training should include lots of shadow practicing the new technique as you work to ingrain it.Let's say you want to develop a backhand loop against backspin. You could practice it for 5-10 minutes with a partner, and then look for chances to use it in a game against your usual practice partners. Or you could arrange to practice it for perhaps an hour a day for a time, and arrange practice matches specifically around developing this shot. Let's look at both of these methods of practice, using the backhand loop against backspin as an example.How do you practice the backhand loop against backspin? Ideally, find a coach or player who can feed multiball to you and go at it. (Make sure to have a coach or top player help you out first so you do it right.) Or practice it against a robot, though don't do this exclusively - you want to learn to react to a ball coming off a racket as well. Or have someone just push your backspin serve back over and over so you can practice the shot. (But remember that you get many more shots per time with multiball or a robot.) Do the shot over and Over and OVER until it is so ingrained you can do it in your sleep. It has to become muscle memory, and that doesn't happen by practicing it haphazardly now and then. You have to practice it relentlessly until it becomes a part of you.Once the shot is pretty much ingrained in this way, you need to use it in practice matches. And here is where many players make a major mistake - they look to use it against their peers, who may not give you the shot you want. Instead, seek out someone who will normally push your serve back right at your backhand, allowing you to use the shot over and over. Or someone who will serve and push, allowing you to backhand loop. This usually means playing a weaker player, where you can control the start of the rally and get the shot you want to practice. Get the shot ingrained in this way as something you can do regularly in a match.It's only after this that you would focus on using it in matches against your peers. Now you might not get as many easy chances to do the shot, but when the chance comes, hopefully it's now so ingrained you'll do it automatically. And at this point, it is part of your regular repertoire.Whatever shot you are trying to perfect, use the same type of thinking shown here to saturate your practice so you can develop the shot. And then keep developing it, while perhaps sometimes using a little saturation training to develop other parts of your game.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1613title: September 16, 2013 - Real Tactics Versus Parroting Tacticsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:"Real Tactics" are the tactics that a player should use in a given match to maximize his chances of winning. "Parroting Tactics" are the tactics that many players use because it's what everyone seems to be doing, and so they figure (consciously or subconsciously) it's what they should be doing as well. When two players of equal ability play, and one uses "Real Tactics" and the other uses "Parroting Tactics," guess who usually wins?The classic example of "Parroting Tactics" would be rarely serving deep to the forehand. At the higher levels, if you serve deep to the forehand, the opponent almost always loops, and the server is at a disadvantage. And so at higher levels you rarely see deep serves to the forehand except as an occasional surprise. At lower levels, opponents often cannot loop effectively or consistently against deep serves to the forehand, and usually have better control on the backhand side, and so are much better if the opponent serves to their backhand side - which most players obligingly do, since that's what they see stronger players doing.There is some argument to the idea that a player should play higher-level tactics if he wants to be a higher-level player, and so should avoid serving deep to the forehand since that's generally not a higher-level tactic. But this misses the point. The higher-level tactics that usually goes on in higher-level matches is not about avoiding serving deep to the forehand because others don't do that; it's about zeroing in on the opponent's weaknesses and going after them. They don't think, "I'm a higher-level player, and so I shouldn't serve deep to the forehand." They think, "My opponent has a strong forehand loop, and so I shouldn't serve deep to the forehand." The same higher-level tactics, if applied at lower levels, would be, "My opponent has a weak forehand loop, and so I should serve deep to the forehand." And that's what most lower-level players should do, if the tactic works.You don't develop higher-level tactical skills by playing weak tactics. You develop them by playing strong tactics, i.e. "Real Tactics." If the opponent has a weak forehand loop, you serve to it, no matter what the level. Against six-time U.S. Men's Singles Champion David Zhuang, a pips-out penholder, most players would serve short (which he was very good against) or long to his backhand (allowing him to control the backhand diagonal, which he was also very good at doing), rather than serve long to his forehand, where his pips limited the effectiveness of his receive and where he'd be drawn out of his favored backhand position. A few players figured this out and would regularly serve long backspin to his wide forehand (often "half-long," so the ball barely went off the end), and then counter-attack effectively to his open backhand side.I once coached a player who had lost the first game at deuce after serving over and over to his opponent's strong backhand. I told him he should both serve AND receive every ball to the opponent's weak forehand until the opponent won two points in a row. I even had him serve from the middle and forehand side so he could get a bigger angle into the forehand side. My player went up 9-0 before losing a point, and won the next three games easily by relentlessly going to the opponent's forehand side.Obviously there is a limit. If the opponent knows you are going to the forehand, and you do so over and Over and OVER, he might get used to it. So you would mix in shots the other way, especially if the opponent is camping out over there. But guess what? If your opponent does camp out on the forehand side to protect that side, then his backhand opens up, and so you go there. That's "Real Tactics." "Parroting Tactics" would be to continue to go to the forehand because the player read an article that says he should go over and over to the opponent's weak forehand.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1607title: September 9, 2013 - Where to Serve Short?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players understand the need to serve short (in addition to long serves), since short serves stop the opponent from looping. More advanced players learn the control to serve "half-long," so the second bounce, given the chance, would be right about the end-line. However, many players who serve short do not think about the placement. There are five: short to the extreme forehand, middle forehand, middle, middle backhand, and extreme backhand. Here are the advantages and disadvantages of each. (Some of these are written as if both players were righties. It would be a long article if I covered all possibilities.)Every opponent is different, so test each of them out on these five types of placements and see which one works best for you.Extreme ForehandAdvantages: It makes the receiver reach way over the table, often leading to awkward returns. To guard against this the receiver often has to stay close to the table, making him vulnerable to deep serves, especially to the wide backhand. After returning these serves the receiver may have trouble getting back into position.Disadvantages: It gives the receiver a big angle crosscourt, and also gives maximum table as a target, since there is more court diagonally than down the line. To guard against this angle, the server might not be able to effectively cover down-the-line receives. For a righty serving to a righty, this means the receiver can flip to the wide forehand, and to cover this, the server may have to move to his right, leaving the backhand side vulnerable.Middle ForehandAdvantages: It takes away some of the angle into the forehand and gives less table to flip into. It also forces the receiver to move in differently than against the wide angle - often having to step slightly to the left (for righty versus righty) - and some players have trouble doing this.Disadvantages: The receiver doesn't have to move as far in, so can get in and out more quickly. The receiver also now has a slight angle into the backhand as well as into the forehand. It also allows a receiver with a strong backhand flip (especially a "banana flip," a heavy topspin/sidespin attack against a short ball with the backhand) to more easily step over and use the backhand.MiddleAdvantages: Receiver has to decide in a split second whether to receive forehand or backhand. Serving to the middle takes away the extreme angles in both directions, and leads to the least amount of table the server has to cover. It gives the receiver the least amount of table to receive to since there are no long diagonals from the middle. This is the most popular location for elite players, though of course they vary it.Disadvantages: Receiver can more easily use their stronger side for receiving, forehand or backhand. The receiver can angle the ball equally to both sides.Middle BackhandAdvantages: Only gives a slight angle into the forehand side, so the server can often follow the serve with a forehand from the backhand side. If the serve goes slightly long, he might still get a backhand return instead of a forehand loop.Disadvantages: It allows the receiver to receive backhand without having to reach too much over the table. It gives an angle into the backhand and some angle to the forehand. It's the most common serve at the beginning and intermediate level, so those players are used to this.Extreme BackhandAdvantages: It takes away any angle into the wide forehand (for righty versus righty), and so the server can try to cover the backhand side with his forehand, knowing that if the receiver does give an extreme angled return, he can always switch to backhand. It brings the receiver well over the table, making him vulnerable to deep ball on the next shot. If the serve goes slightly long, you'll most likely get a backhand return instead of a forehand loop.Disadvantages: It gives the receiver an extreme crosscourt angle. It takes away any indecision from the receiver since he'll almost always receive backhand.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1602title: August 26, 2013 - A Step-by-Step Sequence to Learning Pendulum Servesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Want to learn areally spinnypendulum serve? Not just a get-the-ball-in-play one that anyone can return, but one with great spin? One with so much spin that the backspin serves will come back into the net and sidespin ones will break sideways as if yanked by a string? Here's how. (The instructions assume you are right-handed; lefties adjust - sorry.)Step One: Go toYouTubeand put "pendulum serve" in the search box. Lots of videos will come up - study them! Study them. You want to have a good idea of what you are aiming to do.Step Two: Hold the racket out in front of you, forehand side pointing up. (You don't need a table for this.) Toss a ball up, and on the drop spin the bottom of the ball with a right-to-left motion. The ball will jump some to your left. Now tilt your racket slightly so the left side rises (i.e. clockwise). Now repeat, this time contacting the ball on the bottom-left. Now you should be able to spin the ball so that it goes straight up. Catch it and do it again. Do this over and over until you can really spin the ball, and so that it goes straight up. This is how you learn both to spin the ball and to control it. Make sure to just graze the ball - the goal is to make the ball spin. If you do this exercise regularly, pretty soon you be putting tremendous amounts of spin on the ball.Step Three: Repeat step two, except now go back to spinning the very bottom of the ball. The ball will jump to your left some; catch it. Again, the goal here is to both spin the ball and control it. You need to be able to control how far the ball jumps to your left before you go to the next step.Step Four: Now you are ready to try this on a table. Repeat step three, except don't catch the ball - let it go. You should now be able to spin the ball and control it, and so should be able to control where it bounces on the table. Practice this until you can spin the ball and control it so it bounces over the net after one bounce, a legal backspin serve. Remember that the contact point is nearly the very bottom of the ball. Don't worry about the height of the serve; focus on great spin and control. When you get good at this, the ball will come to a stop on the far side, and even bounce backwards. Top players can put so much backspin on the ball that it practically jumps back into the net.Step Five: Now focus on contacting the ball very low to the table, perhaps six inches high, and keeping the ball low to the net. The lower your contact point, and the finer your grazing (i.e. more spin, less speed), the lower it will tend to bounce.Step Six: Go back toYouTubeand again put "pendulum serve" in the search box. Study them! The above is a great way to learn to put backspin on the ball and control it. Now learn to contact the ball with a sideways motion for sidespin-backspin and sidespin. As you get better at it, you'll learn to contact it on the upswing of the pendulum swing for sidespin-topspin. Once you can serve with heavy backspin and control it, it's not that hard to learn the same with other spins.Step Seven: Now it's time to learn the Reverse Pendulum Serve. As above, start by going toYouTubeand put "reverse pendulum serve" in the search box. Repeat the steps above, except now the racket tip points toward you - but otherwise it's exactly the same each step of the way. Good luck!A few key points to remember:Serving is a violent motion. If you want the ball to have lots of spin, you need your racket to move at high speed. That means using your service motion to drive the wrist into the serve, with the wrist snapping into the ball just before contact.Graze the ball near the bottom. (Contact more toward the back of the ball only if you are serving longer and faster.) However, until you learn to really graze the ball very finely you'll end up serving high when you do this. To compensate, contact the ball slightly toward the back of the ball.To keep the ball short, the first bounce on your side of the table should be near the net. However, if you want the ball to go half-long, so second bounce is near the opponent's end-line, the first bounce should be more in the middle of your side of the table (depth-wise).===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1595title: August 19, 2013 - Height of Service Tossdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:How high should you toss the ball when you serve? At all levels there's a huge range, from tosses that challenge the six-inch rule to ones that go up to the rafters. And yet most top players toss the ball up to perhaps head-high. What are the advantages of these different tosses, and how high should you toss?Let's start with the rules. You must throw the ball up at least six inches (that's the height of the net for perspective), and contact it on the drop. There's no limit to how high you can toss it.You can divide tosses into three types: very short tosses, medium-high tosses (the most common), and high tosses.The purpose of ashort-toss serveis to rush the opponent. So these serves should be as short as possible, probably in the 7"-8" range, and often challenging the 6" rule. Many players push this to the limit, and often toss it up less than six inches. (If you do, prepare to be faulted on it sometimes, and for opponents to complain. Ideally, learn to consistently toss it just over six inches.) Short-toss serves are usually done on backhand serves (since higher tosses are tricky to control on that side), though it can be done on other serves. Ironically, since players are so used to higher tosses on forehand serves, a short-toss on that side often appears lower than the same serve on the backhand side, and so a short toss on the forehand side is more likely to rush an opponent - or to have him (often erroneously) complain that the toss is too low. Another advantage of a short-toss serve is the ball is traveling slower at contact, giving great control, especially on height and depth, once the server masters the faster timing required. The disadvantage of a short-toss serve: the server is somewhat rushed.The purpose of ahigh-toss serveis to maximize spin as well as throw off the opponent's timing. By throwing the ball high into the air it maximizes the speed of the dropping ball. A good server can use this to increase spin. To do so, he must still accelerate his racket into the ball at full speed and just graze the ball - not an easy thing to do with a fast-dropping ball. Below the elite levels most high-toss serves are more for show than actually improving the serve - the player often simply doesn't yet have the timing or skill to graze the ball; it takes lots of practice. (But it might still be a good variation if not overused.) By throwing the ball high into the air you also throw off the opponent's timing as he has to stand there, waiting for the ball to come down. It also means he may take his eye off your racket as he watches the ball, and so miss the actual contact when the ball finally reaches it. (Suggestion for receivers - watch the ball only far enough up so as to see how high it'll go, then focus on the server's racket so you don't miss contact.) You can actually divide high-toss serves into two types - high tosses, and super-high tosses. Some throw the ball up perhaps five feet over their head; some throw the ball high up into the rafters, making the receivers crane their necks to follow it. The disadvantage of a high-toss serve: loss of control on spin, speed, height, and depth.The purpose of amedium-high serveis to maximize control. This means tossing the ball perhaps up to perhaps eye level or just above. This allows the server to serve without rushing, and maximizes the overall control of spin, speed, height, and depth. At higher levels, where depth control is so important, this is the most common serve. (Why is depth so important at the higher levels? Because they usually want the serve to be as deep as possible and still be "short," i.e. second bounce right at the end line, or the related version where the second bounce is just barely past the end line.) Another advantage of a medium-high toss is that it allows you more time to do deceptive motions as the ball reaches the contact point. With a short toss, you don't have as much time to do this; with a high-toss serve, the ball goes by so fast you also don't have as much time to do this. With a medium toss, you can do all sorts of racket movements as the ball goes by to deceive your opponent. The disadvantage of a medium-high toss serve is you aren't rushing your opponent, nor are you throwing off his timing or maximizing spin.My recommendation is to focus on medium-high tosses at first, until you have great spin on your serves as well as excellent control. Then you can begin experimenting with shorter and higher tosses. By varying the height of your toss, you can throw off an opponent's timing. At the higher levels, high-toss serves are especially effective, but don't make the mistake of doing them for show; learn to do themeffectively. And that takes lots and lots of practice. As do all great serves.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1589title: August 12, 2013 - Service Contact Pointdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Where should you contact the ball when serving? This is one of those subtle things that many players spend their entire playing lives or careers never realizing they are giving their opponents an advantage. Where you contact the ball makes a significant difference on how your serve goes out and how it is returned. Here are three things to consider when serving.First, your contact point should be low. The higher you contact the ball, the higher it'll tend to bounce on the other side. At minimum, try to contact the ball no more than nine inches or so high, but ideally even lower, even lower than the six-inch net. The lower you contact the ball, the easier it is to keep the ball low. And keeping the ball low when serving is one of the most under-rated parts of serving. It's not just that slightly high serves are easier to attack - they are - but also that super-low serves have to be lifted over the net, forcing weaker and less consistent returns. They also cut off most aggressively angled returns.Second, contact should be as close to the table's end line as possible. If you contact the ball a foot behind the end-line, you give your opponent that much extra time to react to your serve. Why give him that time? Some players do toss the ball backwards when serving, since this allows them to essentially throw the ball back into their racket, which can give extra spin. (It also makes it easier to illegally hide the serve.) The rules state that the ball must be thrown up "near vertical," so there is some leeway here. In general, however, you want to give the opponent as little time to react as possible, so even if you throw the ball back some (within the confines of "near vertical"), you should balance this against the extra time the opponent has to read your serve.Third, for fast serves that go deep on the table, move the contact point back. To maximize the speed on your serve, you want the ball to travel over the table for the maximum time between bounces so that gravity (and topspin, if you served with that) has the most time to pull the ball down, thereby maximizing how fast you can potentially serve. This means the first bounce should be as close to your end-line as possible, with the second bounce very deep on the opponent's side. To do this, you need to contact the ball a little behind the end-line, perhaps a foot back. The contact point should be very low to the table, no more than a few inches higher than table height, allowing you to serve the ball mostly forward and very low to the net, to maximize the speed you can put on the ball and still keep the ball on the table.So focus on the position and height of the contact point on your serves, and take your service game to new heights!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1582title: August 5, 2013 - Blocking Tipsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the biggest differences between players at any level and players a little below them are their blocking skills. When watching two attackers of about the same level play, often the quickest way to judge who is the stronger player is by whoever handles the other's attack better, i.e. who blocks better. Or watch the best players in the world, especially the Chinese, and when they aren't counterlooping, watch how proficient and consistent they are blocking. Spectators often see the flashy attack shots, but often the biggest difference between these top players and those a level weaker are their blocking games. Here are twelve tips on improving your blocking game. (These are primarily for inverted and short pips players.)Be quick and decisive when blocking. Blocking is not for the weak of heart, and is not a passive shot. Even soft blocks should be aggressively soft, i.e. a change of pace, not just a weak block.Block aggressively against loops that land short and against slow loops. If you block these passively, you'll face the consequences. Loops that land short are easy to attack (with aggressive block, smashes, or counterloops), while if you return a spinny loop passively the spin takes on your racket more, making you less consistent.Keep your blocks deep unless you are dead blocking. Deep blocks force the opponent off the table, cut off their angles, and give yourself more time to react to their next shot. Shorter blocks are usually easy putaways for opponents who are in position.Block to all three spots - wide corners and opponent's middle, where they have to decide whether to use forehand or backhand. Avoid blocking anywhere else. Why would you?Often change directions at the last second. This is especially easy and effective on the backhand, in particular by aiming wide to the backhand, then blocking aggressively to the wide forehand at the last second.Against faster loops use the opponent's own speed to redirect the ball back aggressively. Think of it as a video or pinball game.Blocking at the higher levels requires just as much footwork as attacking. Be light on your feet, and step to the ball; don't reach except as a last resort.Master the forehand down-the-line block. Many players are handicapped by only being able to block forehands crosscourt. This turns them into punching bags for opponents who know where your next shot is each time.Learn to change the pace with dead blocks, and perhaps chop and sidespin blocks. But if you are going to use these shots, practice them both in drills and practice matches.Consider learning to topspin your blocks, essentially mini-loops. Many players don't realize that many or most top players block with topspin off the bounce, almost mini-loops.Study opponents to see how soon you can pick up where they are placing their attacks. If you do this, your subconscious will pick up on it, it'll become second nature, and you'll begin to react sooner. You don't need fast reflexes to have fast reactions; fast reactions come from proper training over a period of time.When you force a weak ball with your blocks, change from a blocking mentality to attack mode. Far too many players force an opponent into making a weak return - and then continue blocking. Your blocking has done its job; now's the time to attack!!!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1574title: July 29, 2013 - Topspinny Backhandsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the biggest changes in our sport at the higher levels since I started playing in the late 1970s is the development of what I call the "topspinny backhand." (I should trademark that term.) When I started, most players had relatively flat backhands, with only a little topspin. The idea was to hit or block aggressively. A few players backed up and backhand looped, but few players played close to the table and tried to topspin heavily with their backhands. Part of this was the equipment - modern sponges are much bouncier and better for this.At first glance, a good, hard, flat backhand is a better shot. After all, it tends to come out faster, and it's easier to time, as opposed to trying to take a bigger swing and spin the ball off the bounce. There were many big backhand hitters and great blockers back in those days, but only a few really spun their backhands off the bounce over and over. (Tibor Klampar and Anton Stipancic are two that did.)These days nearly everyone at the higher levels topspins off the bounce. There's a terminology problem - it's not quite a backhand loop (usually), but it's more than a regular backhand. Hence my term, "topspinny backhand."What are the advantages of these topspinny backhands?The topspin pulls the ball down, just as it does for a loop, and so you effectively have a larger target.The topspin jumps off the table, messing up the opponent's timing. When a player hits a ball flat, it travels at roughly the same speed to the opponent, so it's easy for the opponent to time it. When a player hits the ball with topspin, it starts out at one speed, then jumps when it hits the table, making it harder to react to and time.The topspin jumps off the opponent's paddle, further messing up his timing.Against a flatter ball, an opponent can take a step off the table to give himself more time to react, but against a ball with a lot of topspin, he has to take it relatively quick off the bounce when blocking or counter-hitting or he'll likely hit a weak or erratic shot, meaning he has less time to react.One of the tougher questions for coaches is when to start players with topspinny backhands. Some say around 1800 (roughly advanced intermediate level). Others teach it almost from the start. I've seen it successfully learned both ways. But it does help to develop this shot somewhat early or you may get ingrained in your habits. I developed a flatter backhand early in my development, and while I can demonstrate a topspinny backhand, I'd have to spend a lot of practice time if I wanted to incorporate it into my game - and there's no guarantee that I'd be able to do so successfully after 37 years of flat backhands.It's your choice - go flat or go topspinny!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1572title: July 22, 2013 - Pushing Change of Directiondate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Far too often players make two mistakes when pushing. First, they push to the backhand over and Over and OVER. Second, early in their stroke they aim their racket where they are pushing, usually to the backhand, in an apparent attempt to make it absolutely clear that once again that is where they are pushing. This is a great collaboration with your opponent, but not a good way to win.First, let's review what makes a good long push. It normally should be quick, low, heavy, deep, and wide. (Exceptions: sometimes you no-spin push as a variation, so it doesn't always need to be heavy; and sometimes you push quick to the middle so the opponent has to decide whether to use forehand or backhand.)But there is one other important element - last-second changes of direction. If you aim your racket to the opponent's wide backhand, he'll likely react to that and prepare for a deep push to the backhand. If, at the last second, you change and quick push to the wide forehand, you'll likely cause havoc for your opponent as he makes a last-second lunge for the ball. Ironically, this is especially effective against players with strong forehand loops, the very players you would normally not push to the forehand against, since they are often edging toward their backhand side, looking to forehand loop from that side.At higher levels, players push short more often, especially when returning a serve. If your opponent serves short backspin, instead of just pushing it short, why not aim to his backhand, and then at the last second drop it short to the forehand? Again, this causes havoc, and in this case you aren't challenging your opponent's a forehand loop. Moving in to return a short ball to the forehand takes time, so why not try to trick your opponent into anticipating the ball coming to the backhand, and watch as at the last second he lunges in for the short ball to the forehand?Moral: Don't just be pushy, be deceptively pushy!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1564title: July 15, 2013 - Adjusting to Weird Serves and Shotsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:There are two ways to adjust to "weird" serves and shots. One is to practice againstevery single one of them, until you are comfortable againstevery single one of them. Since there are a huge number of ways to serve or hit a ball, and anything that's not "orthodox" can be considered "weird," this would mean basically turning your practice sessions into just practice against these weird shots, as opposed to developing a foundation to your game. This would be a mistake.While you should sometimes practice against seemingly weird serves and shots you might see in a match - especially the more common ones - it's better to focus on developing a strong foundation to your shots. This allows you to develop complete command over your shots. When developing a shot, but before a player really has command of it, he mostly does the shot robotically, meaning he can do it against the same incoming ball over and over, but can't adjust to anything different, i.e. "weird." But with practice, you develop command of the shot and it becomes so ingrained that adjusting to different shots becomes easier and easier. But it takes experience - not against every possibility, but experience adjusting to different incoming shots until you become used to making adjustments and have confidence you can do so.You don't need to practice against every type of weird incoming shot to be able to deal with each of them. What's needed are two things: command of your shots, and general experience in adjusting. By playing lots of matches against lots of different players (whether practice, league, or tournament) you develop the habit of adjusting. And then, when you do play something different, you don't need to spend huge amounts of time learning to adjust to it; you've already developed that habit. If you have command of your own shots, and have developed the habit of adjusting to different shots, then you'll have little trouble adjusting to whatever an opponent can throw at you. This, and a little tactical thinking to figure out the weakness of the opponent's shots, are all that's needed to give you the advantage.The key thing to remember is this - if the opponent is doing something weird, then pretty much by definition it's not standard technique, and there's probably a reason for that. If you have command of your shots and are used to adjusting to opponents, and do a little tactical thinking to figure out the weakness of the opponent's technique, then your more standard technique will give you an advantage over this less standard technique.One hint that'll help against most "weird" rally shots: keep the ball deep on the table, and you'll have more time to react to their shots. Remember that they are used to your more standard shots, while you are not as used to theirs.Beginners dread playing against "weird" players. Top players look forward to it knowing the player's game is flawed.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1558title: July 8, 2013 - Expect to Windate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you expect to win a match, you'll do better than if you don't expect to win. It's as simple as that. You may go into the match knowing it'll be the fight of your life, but if you expect to win it, you'll have a much better chance of doing so. Even against a player who is so much stronger that you objectively have little chance, you'll do better if you expect to win, and will have the proper mindset to figure out what you need to work on so you can do even better next time.Of course, we've all had that experience of playing someone who was much better, i.e. a "top player." But if you are practicing regularly and are about to play a "top player," ask yourself this: Are you practicing regularly tonotbe a top player? Hopefully not, in which case you are practicing tobea top player. So when you play a top player, it's your chance to be what you practice to be. ("Top player" is, of course relative, depending on your own perspective and goals; to some, that's a world-class player, to others it's the neighborhood or club champ.)Here's a simple test. If when you lose a match you don't have a few seconds of disbelief that you lost, then you didn't really expect to win. This should happen even after you play a top player. If it doesn't happen, you didn't expect to win, and you are handicapping yourself both now and in the future.Part of expecting to win for improving players is having confidence that even if you lose, you'll figure out what you need to do so you'll win next time, i.e. you may lose now, but fully expect to win next time. Here's another test. If after a match you think, "I would have won if not for [I couldn't return his serve, I missed my first attacks, I couldn't block his loop, etc.], then you have pretty much accepted your current level. If you are trying to improve, instead you should be thinking, "I can beat him next time because I will improve my [return of serve, learn to do the serve I had trouble with so I can win with it too, work on my first attack, work on my block, learn to loop so the other guy has as much trouble with my loop as I did with his, etc.]."Often the root cause of a player not expecting to win is because the opponent does something so much better that the player thinks he can't compete. Never compare your opponent's best shot to yours; of course anyone near your level will do some things better than you, often much better in fact. But the same applies to you - against your peers, you also do something much better. Your goal is to find ways to tactically dominate more with your strengths more than they do with theirs - and expect to win as a result.Expecting to win is a mindset you need to develop if you want to maximize your performance both now and in the future. It involves psychological, tactical, and strategic thinking. Psychological thinking is the confidence that youcanwin and so expect to win. Tactical thinking is thinking about your tactics so as to realize your expectations of winning. Strategic thinking is thinking about what you need to improve in your game so as to meet your expectations of winning next time. Use all three types of thinking and your expectations of winning will likely become a reality.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1546title: June 24, 2013 - Feet and Gripdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When I coach someone, the very first thing I look at are their grip and feet positioning. If either of these are done improperly, everything in between will likely be twisted like a rubber band into an awkward stroke that players and coaches will often try to fix by treating the symptoms rather than the root of the problem. Get them right, and everything in between tends to straighten out. New players should focus on this to develop their strokes properly; more experienced players should focus on this to correct fix improper strokes they may have developed.For example, a shakehander might hold the racket with a forehand grip, so that the racket is rotated to the left (for a righty), with the index finger partly off the racket rather than flat across it near the base. This means the racket is aiming slightly downward on the forehand side when the arm is aiming forward. Or a player might use a backhand grip, so that the racket is rotated to the right, with the thumb almost flat on the racket rather than the thumbnail roughly perpendicular to the surface. Now the racket is aiming slightly upward on the forehand side when the arm is aiming forward. In both cases the player has to adjust his stroke to compensate for the fact that his racket and arm aren't pointing in the same direction, leading to awkward positioning of the elbow and shoulder, and even the body and feet can be thrown into awkward contortions to compensate. At the advanced levels, some players do use slight forehand or backhand grips, but only after the shots are ingrained, and always for a specific purpose (i.e. to strengthen one side, even at the cost of the other side). Until the strokes are ingrained, players should use a more neutral grip, so that the thinnest part of the wrist lines up with the racket.Common foot placement problems include feet too close together when they should be more than shoulder width apart (especially with taller players); feet parallel instead of the tips pointing a bit outwards; weight on the heels or evenly distributed when it should be on the front inside part of the foot; and (for righties) the right foot either parallel to the left, or too far behind it, when (for beginners) it should be in between these two extremes, and so only slightly back. Each of these problems leads to technique problems where the root of the problem often isn't obvious, and so players and coaches try to fix the symptoms rather realize the problems stems from the feet positioning.For example, if a right-handed player has his right foot too far back, then he won't be able to rotate at the hips, waist, and shoulders, since to do so would mean turning almost straight backwards, and he ends up with an awkward mostly-arm stroke. Seeing this, many players and coaches tell the player to rotate the hips, waist, and shoulders, thinking that's the problem when that's just a symptom of the problem, and so they make the problem even worse. Or if the right foot is parallel to the left foot, it becomes awkward to rotate properly because the amount of rotation needed to compensate for the foot positioning is too much. Again, a player or coach might tell the player to do more rotation rather than addressing the root of the problem. (At the more advanced levels, where players have learned to rotate into shots properly, a supple player often does play forehands with the feet parallel, but that's only after the proper stroke has been ingrained.)Imagine your body is a rubber band pulled tight. If you twist either side, the rest of it twists, leading to twisted strokes that'll handicap you for the rest of your playing days. Untwist the ends, and everything in between smooths out. Do you want a smooth game or one that is twisted into knots?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1538title: June 17, 2013 - Shadow Practice for Strokes and Footworkdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:A great way to improve the sharpness and steadiness of your shots is to shadow practice them. This means practicing your shots without the ball. One of the best things that ever happened to me when I was a beginner was when I was told to shadow practice my forehand and backhand drives and loops, and side-to-side footwork, one hundred times a day. This was a primary reason why I went from beginner at age 16 to 1900+ in about two years.For Beginning Players:focus on the basics. You want to develop smooth, repeatable shots and footwork. You might want to have a coach work with you first, so you aren't practicing bad habits. Once you know what to do, do perhaps fifty to a hundred forehand and backhand drives, and fifty to a hundred forehand and backhand loops. Then go side to side fifty to a hundred times, stroking each time (either all forehand, or alternate forehand and backhand).One key thing: remember that strokes have three parts: backswing, forward swing, and back to ready position. Many players tend to just go back and forth (going directly from forward swing to backswing), which you never do in a game. The stroke should go through a triangular motion (dropping down to ready position), not just a back and forth motion.For Intermediate Players:Focus on improving the speed, crispness and power of the shots and footwork. Think about the type of specific movements you do in a game, and mimic them. For example, if you want to develop a powerful forehand loop that you can use from all parts of the table, then shadow practice powerful forehand loops, from both the wide forehand and wide backhand, as well as from the middle, and practice moving from one spot to another. (Note--intermediate players should also use some of the techniques explained for advanced players.)For Advanced Players:At this point, your shots are consistent and powerful. You should continue to do the shadow practice as explained for intermediate players. However, now you should add randomness. As you shadow practice, imagine you are playing a real match. Imagine a specific opponent, and play out the rallies--except now you are playing at whatever level you hope to attain. Want to be a world-class player? Then shadow practice rallies as if you are world-class! Instead of alternating forehand loops from side to side, add randomness - imagine your opponent spraying the ball all over the court. For example, after looping a forehand from the backhand court, your "opponent" might put one to the wide forehand, which you then cover; or he might block one right back to your backhand again, which you've vacated after the previous shot to get back into position, and so you either step around again for the forehand, or play a backhand attack shot.You can also practice receive techniques - imagine an opponent's serve, read it, and return it. You might step in, drop a ball short or flip it, then step back and attack the next ball. Or you might shadow practice looping the deep serves. Think of what happens in a real match, and play out those points.For All Players:You can practice everything this way, except for the actual timing of hitting the ball - and you can do that later at the table, with much faster, stronger and crisper shots because of the shadow practicing. And the nice thing is you can shadow practice anywhere - at work, at home, on the subway. (Okay, that last one might get you strange looks--but I've done it before!)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1531title: June 10, 2013 - Staying Lowdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the biggest problems beginning/intermediate players have is standing up too straight. Watch the top players and you'll see how they stay low - feet relatively wide and pointing slightly outward, weight toward the front inside balls of their feet, knees bent, and leaning slightly forward from the waist. This allows much stronger play than standing up straight - you'll move quicker, have better balance, recovery more quickly after shots, and your shots will be more natural and more powerful. And you'll even feel more like an athlete because you'll be playing like one!Here's a good example - here are highlights of theMen's Singles Final at the 2013 World Championshipsbetween Zhang Jike and Wang Hao, both of China. Or pull up just about any video between two top players. It may not be easy to play with a lower stance at first. Older players and those with knee problems might have particular problems, and might need to adjust - but even they should focus on staying at least somewhat low.Why is staying low important?It lowers your center of gravity. This increases your leverage in movement, giving you a quicker start.The bent knees give you a quicker start. If your knees are straight, you'll have to bend them before you can move.The wider stance gives you stability and balance during rallies. It's hard to play effectively if you are off balance. Players who stand up too straight tend to make up for this by reaching for the ball instead of moving to it, leading to awkward and inconsistent shots.The wider and lower stance increases power. The extra power comes from a greater weight exchange as you rotate about from a wider stance (especially on forehand shots), and from the extra power from the legs from staying low, allowing you to push off into your shots.Quicker recovery. This comes because the wider and lower stance allows better balance. Players who stand up too straight will go off balance after a fast movement or powerful shot, and will be slower in recovering, especially on the forehand.It makes your shots more natural. If you stand up straight, your natural stroking movement will be up, but your target is ahead of you. Staying low gives you a more natural shot in the direction of the far side of the table, and allows you to more easily put your body weight into it. It might not be natural at first, but it will once you get used to it.It makes it easier to loop heavy backspin with power. While standing up straight gives you a natural lifting stroke, it doesn't give much power for great topspin and speed. For that, you need to use your legs, and to use your legs you have to get down with the knees at least slightly bent.Besides table tennis players, you can find examples of athletes staying low in many sports - for example, an infielder in baseball, a goalie in soccer, and basketball players when they are dribbling or covering someone.You might have to build up your leg strength to stay low - but staying low in itself builds up those muscles, and the more you do it, the stronger your legs will be, and the easier it becomes. Truly serious players should hit the weight room and focus on lower body strength training.You can make the change to a lower stance in stages, focusing on staying a bit lower for a week, and a bit more the following week, and so on until you find a comfortable low stance. If this doesn't work, try going for the other extreme, and practice staying too low. (Careful if you have knee problems!) It may feel silly, but after playing that way for a short time you may find it easier to compromise between the too-low stance and your previous too-high stance.And when you develop the habit of staying lower, you'll begin to feel the benefits as your game improves. A lower stance will allow you to stand tall on the winner's podium.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1524title: June 4, 2013 - Five Steps to a Great Spin Servedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:There are five steps, roughly in this order. Serving takes practice, often alone with a box of balls as you serve, over and over. Take your time; don't rapid-fire serve. Visualize what you want to do with each serve as you practice, and then try to match what you visualize. You might want to get a coach to help at the start, or watch what top players do, and perhaps get their help. Learn to follow your serve with an attack - often it's the threat of the follow-up shot that makes the serve effective as opponents try to be too perfect with their returns. (Have a question about spin? Here's my articleEverything You Ever Wanted to Know About Spin - But Were Afraid to Ask!)Put great spin on the ballThere is no substitute for this. Spin comes from racket speed and grazing motion. Racket speed comes mostly from the arm and (even more) the wrist, which need to work together to accelerate the racket into the ball. (Contact should be near the tip of the racket, which is the fastest moving part of the blade in a normal serving motion.) Even more important, however, is the grazing motion, which is what takes so much practice. When you can graze the ball so that nearly all of your racket speed becomes spin, you are well on your way toward developing a great spin serve. You can practice this away from the table - get a box of balls and serve on a rug, and watch how the ball spins on the rug. Make the backspins come back to you, the sidespins break sideways, and the topspins jump away.Put different spins on the ballIt's not enough to just make the ball spin; you need to develop different spins. Most players start out by learning simple backspin and topspin serves. Next you should develop sidespin serves, and then combinations - sidespin-backspin and sidespin-topspin (usually called side-back and side-top serves). Then you should add a no-spin serve that looks spinny (called "heavy no-spin"), where you use a big racket motion but hit the ball near the base of the racket and so put little spin on the ball. Finally, you might learn to serve with corkscrewspin, where you'll have to toss the ball up higher.Put different spins on the ball and control itHaving all these great spinny serves isn't so great if you are popping the balls up or can't control the depth. High serves are going to get attacked, and consistently long serves will also get attacked by stronger players. Learn to serve so the ball crosses the net very low. (Do this by contacting the ball low to the table.) Learn to control the depth of your serve so you can serve it very long (so first bounce is near the end-line) and short (so that given the chance, the ball would bounce twice on the receiver's side). Also learn to do "half-long" serves, where the second bounce, given the chance, would be right at the end-line, often the most difficult serves to return effectively. Learn to do these serves to all parts of the table - left, right, and middle.Put different spins on the ball with the same motionServing different spins won't always help if the opponent can easily see what type of spin you are serving. So learn to use the same motion for different spins. This means using a serve motion where the racket at different times is traveling down, sideways, and up, in one continuous motion. Then you can vary the spin by simply varying where in the service motion you contact the ball. For example, with a forehand pendulum serve (with the racket tip down), you would start with the racket moving down, then sideways, and then up. You can also rotate your racket as you serve, so you can vary the spin by varying the contact point on the racket.Put different spins on the ball with the same fast, quick motionOnce you've learned to do all of the above, it's time to ramp it up by doing it faster and faster. Instead of a leisurely down, sideways, and up motion, do the entire motion in a few inches in the wink of an eye, making it almost impossible for any but a highly experience receiver to pick up the type of spin from the contact point. Better still exaggerate the part of the motion where you aren't contacting the ball, so that if you are serving side-top, exaggerate the down motion; if you are serving side-back, exaggerate the up motion.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1516title: May 28, 2013 - What to Do at the End of a Close Gamedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:You know the problem: you're playing well, you're battling with stronger players, and every game is close -but you can't quite win. Far too often you lose those close ones and have nothing to show for your great play but another "what if..." - and hopefully, just maybe, a little more experience so you'll do better next time. So how does one close out a match?First, let me introduce you to what I call "Larry's Six-Month Law," or simply Larry's Law for short. In short, it says that when a player improves or is playing well, he may battle with "stronger" players, but at first he'll lose most of the close ones. Why? Because the other guy has more experience playing at that higher level, both tactically and psychologically, and so has more experience at what to do to win at that level, especially in close games. It doesn't mean you can't beat them, it simply means you need to gain experience at that level so you'll know what to do in those close games.So what should you do? That largely depends on your playing style. But the most important thing is that during the match you have learned what does and does not work in this match-up between you and your opponent - or more specifically, your style and your opponent's style, and your strengths and weaknesses against your opponent's strengths and weaknesses.There are generally two ways to score points at the end of a close match. You can do something tricky, such as a deceptive serve or an unexpected spin (such as a suddenly heavy push or loop), and perhaps win an easy point. This works at all levels, but especially at lower and intermediate levels. By the higher levels such tricks are less successful, though they still work if used sparingly, and more often to set up a follow-up shot than as an outright point-winner. Many experienced players develop a few tricks to pull out in close games, most often with a tricky serve.The other way is to force your game on the opponent with your serve and receive. On your serve you get to choose how to start the rally, and by the end of a close game you should know what serves will set you up for your game. Receive can be trickier since you don't know what the opponent will be serving - and presumably he's serving to set uphisgame. But a good receive can take control of a point just as well as a good serve. Focus both on what you do well and what your opponent does not.Keep it simple. Ideally look toward tactics that narrow down your opponent's options so you have a good idea what's coming. For example, if you have a good loop against backspin, and your opponent pushes most of your backspin serves, then serve backspin and loop. If you like fast topspin rallies, then perhaps serve topspin to the opponent's weaker side (or perhaps to his stronger side, so you can follow with a quick shot to the weaker side), and go at it. Or do whatever serves set you up to do what you do best, and have confidence in.Winning close games at any level is both a tactical and psychological battle. More close games are won and lost on the psychological aspect than on the tactical. You need both, but good tactics do not work if you are too nervous to execute. If you find yourself unable to do in a close game what you could do earlier, then you need to learn to clear your mind before playing each point, and perhaps study sports psychology.A player who is consistently successful in close games always knows what to do in those key points, from long-term experience at that level, from what happened in that particular match to that point, and because he's psychologically confident in his ability to execute the needed shots. So should you.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1508title: May 20, 2013 - Tools and Tactics for the Physically Challengeddate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Table Tennis is an Olympic Sport, and at the highest levels, is played by some of the best athletes on the planet. Even at levels below world class it is dominated by great physical athletes who can race about the court ripping shot after shot. But we're not all great physical athletes, and we're not about to give up against an opponent just because he can race around the court ripping shot after shot, and we can't, are we? So how can one compete with an opponent who is faster, stronger, and more athletic? Or against a kid who might not be bigger and stronger, but who can seemingly rally at ten times your pace?To do so you need to think both strategically and tactically. Strategically, you need to develop the tools needed to defeat these physical phenoms. Tactically, you need to learn how to use those tools. So what are these tools, and how can you use them?  There are a number of ways of defeating a more athletic opponent. Here are ten tools you can develop in your game to turn an Arnold Schwarzenegger into a 90-pound weakling and kick ping-pong sand in their face.Serves, serves, and serves. This could be the first three items. You have complete control over the start of the rally when serving, and this is where great athletes can be turned into quivering masses of mishits. A book could be written on this topic alone. Suffice to say that you should use serves to set up your best shot, and to set up the other tools outlined below. Mix in short and long serves, with extreme and varying spins. Often the best tactics is to mix in short serves to the forehand and long, breaking spin serves to the backhand. Or just serve short backspin (and no-spin) and loop first.Receive, receive, and receive. This could be the next three items. Above I said that the server has complete control over the start of the rally. The key word there is "start," and if you develop strong receive, you take control. You don't want to take on a faster opponent in a speed battle by attacking all his serves. Instead, focus on variation and control. Use your receive just as you used your serve, to set up your best shot, and to set up the other tools outlined below. The key difference is that you can use these tools as your receive, and set the tone for the rally.Spin. Table tennis is a game of spin, and you should use the extremes to mess up your athletic opponent. Use both heavy topspin and heavy backspin so that he has to make major adjustments. Heavy, deep backspins slow the pace down; even if your athletic opponent attacks it, it'll likely be a slower shot that you can block or counter-attack aggressively. If you topspin, focus on slow, spinny loops that go deep on the table, and watch your opponent struggle to deal with these. He's probably used to something faster; don't give it to him. So look to push heavy or loop very spinny, both deep on the table. (I could have broken this down into Backspin and Topspin, but I really believe they go together in this context.)Deep. If the ball is deep, your opponent can't rush you, and he's often jammed. A steady player can out-rally a faster, stronger one as long as he keeps the ball deep. So practice rallying deep on the table, both in topspin and backspin rallies.Short. If you can push a ball short and low, it'll tie up your opponent over the table, leaving him vulnerable to a follow-up deep shot. It'll also take most of his attack away.Vary Pace and Depth. While keeping the ball deep is important in most rallies, mix in softer and shorter shots to mess up an opponent's timing. Great athleticism doesn't mean great timing, and moving an opponent in and out can make an athlete look like he's been snake-bit.Move the Ball Around. Focus on the three spots - wide backhand, wide forehand, and middle (roughly the opponent's playing elbow, his crossover shot between forehand and backhand). If your opponent is mostly a forehand player, play the corners. (Yes, go to his wide forehand so you can draw him out of position and come back to his backhand, plus he's often looking for forehands from the backhand side, and so shots to the forehand can be hard for him to handle well.) If he's more two-winged, then go after his middle to draw him out of position, and then go after the corners.Deceptive Placement. Aim one way, then go the other. This is especially effective when pushing or blocking. The most common way is to aim a backhand push or block crosscourt, and at the last second go to the wide forehand.Out-Rally Him. Don't take on a faster opponent in a speed battle. Instead, take the ball a little later to give yourself time to react, and play steady and deep rallies until the opponent either misses or gives you a ball to attack. Often it's effective to start the rally off with one quick shot, and then play steady - the contrast can throw off the faster opponent's timing. Against some players you can just pin down on their weaker side (usually the backhand) and play deep balls there over and over until they miss (though you should look for chances to move the ball around or change the pace or spin). Against others you need to keep moving the ball around so the opponent is forced to hit shots on the move.Stay Focused and Play Smart. It's often said that table tennis is 90% mental. Let your opponent have the other 10%; just make sure you win the 90% mental battle.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1499title: May 13, 2013 - Beat Unorthodox Players with Fundamentalsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:How often have you played somebody with, for lack of a better word, weird shots? Perhaps they hit shots with a floppy wrist (so you could never tell where the shot was going), or with sidespin on shots that normally don't have sidespin, or perhaps they just used a non-inverted surface that you weren't used to seeing. There are infinite possibilities. The problem was that you found these "weird" shots difficult to play against with your more fundamental game. Why does one with sounder fundamentals have problems with weirder games, and how can you overcome that?There's nothing wrong with having a little weird in your game to throw opponents off. But there's a reason why certain shots, mostly done with inverted rubber, are done by the top players, and are considered orthodox play. Learn these fundamentals, and you'll have an advantage over those who have not mastered these fundamentals. This doesn't mean you'll win, but a player with weaker fundamentals will have to essentially play at a higher level just to match you. For example, to use the floppy wrist example mentioned above, the timing needed for such shots is much higher than for more orthodox technique, and so that player will always be handicapped by this. But this is often offset by the inherent "weirdness" of the shot, since you aren't used to it. How do you overcome this?The keys are depth and consistency. Against any type of weird shot, if you keep the ball deep on the table, you'll have more time to react to the less orthodox shots coming back at you. Given time, your better technique should beat the weaker technique, unless the other player is simply better. Given the time needed, your more orthodox shots should be more consistent at any given pace than the less orthodox version.It's not always this simple. For example, depth may give you more time to react to the opponent's shot, but it also gives him time to attack, especially by looping. So against a looping opponent with unorthodox technique, you might start by going short, or perhaps long to a spot where he can't loop (often deep to wide backhand), or simply find ways to attack first (deep on the table), and then turn it into a more even battle of good versus "bad" technique. Or against a non-inverted surface, where it's the surface that's "weird," not the technique, you would need to understand the properties of that surface so you can play against it properly - but again, depth will give you more time to react to it.There has always been an age-old battle of standard versus non-standard technique. Sometimes the non-standard technique becomes standard, such as reverse penhold backhand, the banana flip and other backhand flips (often done against balls that are short to the forehand, once considered a no-no), or even looping itself (which was a "weird" shot until it became more common in the 1960s). And sometimes a player with "good" technique has something different to throw at opponents, such as the grip change to a very forehand grip Timo Boll often does when looping to get an extreme and "weird" inside-out forehand loop.But good technique (i.e. sound fundamentals) almost always wins out against the less sound ones, so you should master these fundamentals. It's often after players have mastered these fundamentals that they experiment with other ways, and sometimes find something to do that is "different."  (Here's a related article I wrote on this, "Develop the Fundamentals: Strokes and Footwork.")===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1485title: May 6, 2013 - How to Create a Truly Heavy Backspin Servedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Before we start, here are two videos to watch.Here's a video(1:18) of a Ma Lin of China (shirtless) demonstrating his "ghost serve," where his high-toss serves almost slam backwards into the net due to the extreme backspin. Note how open his racket is. He's not only contacting the bottom of the ball, he's contacting it slightly toward the front with an extremely open racket, with the front slightly higher than the back, and essentially scooping the ball up. (More on this below.)Here's another video(1:21) that shows more clearly how to do this ghost serve, with a lower toss (and so the contact is more under the ball rather than slightly in front). How are these two able to create so much backspin?First, you must learn to graze the ball very finely. This takes practice, and is where most players are lacking. Too often they let the ball sink into the sponge, and so much of their racket speed turns into ball speed. Instead, you should graze the ball so finely that you struggle to get the ball over the net. A key here is that contact should be on the bottom of the ball, with your racket roughly parallel to the floor. If you contact it toward the back, as most players do, then you'll likely sink the ball too much into the sponge.Second, you must have racket speed. This comes from the arm and wrist (though with some serves, such as a pendulum serve, you use your body as well to get the arm going), with the wrist most important. The arm should drive toward the ball, with a vigorous wrist movement right as you contact the ball. As the racket approaches the ball, you should snap the arm and wrist as if snapping a whip.Third, you can get extra backspin with a higher toss. This is because the ball is coming down faster, and you can convert that speed into spin. To do so you must contact the ball not only on the bottom, but even a little bit toward the front of the ball, with the front of the racket slightly higher than the back. This scooping motion seems unnatural to players at first, and makes it tricky to keep the ball low unless you graze the ball very finely, with a contact point very low to the table. The higher toss comes at a price - you lose some control - so you should first perfect your serves with a lower toss (head-high or so) before going for higher tosses. Many or most world-class players prefer a lower toss with slightly less spin because of the increase in control as well as being able to do more deceptive motions in the increased time as the ball goes by.Fourth, the grippier your racket surface, the more backspin you will get.A truly heavy backspin serve that stays low and short is extremely difficult to attack, and so you'll get lots of passive returns (pushes) that you can attack. Players are not used to so much backspin and so often put it in the net. Combine with other spins (including no-spins), and you will create havoc with your opponents.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1471title: April 29, 2013 - The Decline of the High-Toss Serve and Why You Should Learn Itdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The high-toss serve used to be one of the most popular serves at high-level table tennis, and pretty common at the intermediate level as well. There are still plenty of players who use it, but it is not as common as before. Why is this? First, you should understand what the serve is, and its advantages and disadvantages.A high-toss serve is just that - a serve where you toss the ball high into the air, often ten to fifteen feet up. They are the most spectacular of serves. They are also the hardest to control. If you want to learn a high-toss serve, watch how the top players do it, and practice a LOT.Here's a video on the high-toss serve(2:22), featuring Japanese star Jun Mizutani.Most players below the advanced levels can't really control a high-toss serve, and so the serve tends to be easy to attack once you get used to it. But because the serve is "different" many players have trouble with them, even if they aren't done very well. Most high-toss serves are done with a forehand pendulum serve. (For a righty, this means the racket is tip-down, and moves from right to left. For a reverse pendulum serve, the racket would move left to right.)Advantages of a High Toss ServeA higher toss means the ball is traveling faster at contact, which allows you to put more spin on the ball.The higher toss throws off the timing of opponents.DisadvantagesLess control of depth, making it more difficult to serve short.Less control of height, leading to higher serves that are easier to attack.Reverse pendulum serves are difficult to do with a high toss.Faster-moving ball makes it harder to do as much deceptive motion as the ball passes by at contact.From the advantages, you see that you can get more spin on the ball. This is especially effective when going for an extremely heavy backspin serve, which opponents will often put in the net since they aren't used to such heavy backspin - but only if you perfect the serve. It's not easy learning to throw the ball up way in the air and just graze it as it comes down! But if you learn to do so, the serve can be highly effective - especially if you also learn to vary the spin, with varying degrees of backspin, sidespin, and corkscrewspin, as well as no-spin serves that look like backspin. (Not sure what corkscrewspin is, or have other questions on spin? See my article "Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Spin - But Were Afraid to Ask.")However, as you can see there are also disadvantages, and they outnumber the advantages 4-2. This doesn't mean you shouldn't high-toss; it means you have a bit more practice to do. With practice, you can negate the first three disadvantages as you learn to control the depth and height, and perhaps learn to do a reverse pendulum serve with a high toss. (Some players simply use a lower toss for the reverse pendulum serve, and with a high toss only do normal pendulum serves. Not sure what a reverse pendulum serve is?Here's a short article on it, which includes a link to a short video which shows both a regular and reverse pendulum serve.)The key problem with a high-toss serve is the speed at which the ball falls at contact, which is both the strength and weakness of the serve. While it does allow more spin, the faster-moving ball means you have less time for deceptive motion as the ball goes by, as well as a loss of control. Most players find they get more deception and control with a shorter toss, which is why most serves toss the ball perhaps head high. However, the high-toss serve is still a great weapon to have, either as a front-line serve used over and over, or as a variation to throw an opponent off, which is how I use it. Many players will toss the ball head high over and over, and then, perhaps several times a game, using the same motion, they'll suddenly go for a high-toss, which often leads to a completely befuddled opponent who simply isn't ready for the extra spin (especially backspin) of a properly executed high-toss serve.Another advantage of the high-toss serve is that since fewer players are using it than before, players are less used to it, and so have more trouble with them. So if you are looking for an extra weapon for your serving arsenal, get high with the high-toss serve.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1462title: April 22, 2013 - Proper Practice Progression Prevents Poor Playdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Do you do the Six P's? Proper Practice Progression Prevents Poor Play. (Or, as I sometimes put it, "...Pathetic Play.") I've actually heard this as the Five P's, but I've added "Progression." Proper practice progression means starting with the basics and working your way up to more advanced technique for all aspects of your game. It also means practicing these shots in context, i.e. game situations. Think of it this way, using the forehand as an example.Step Oneis develop the forehand, usually with help from a coach or by watching top players, and then by hitting forehand to forehand with someone, or doing multiball with a coach.Step Twois learning to move and hit the forehand, so you do footwork drills, such as 1-1 footwork, where your partner puts the ball alternately to your wide forehand and the middle of the table, and you move side to side hitting all forehands. You can also do this alternating hitting forehands from the middle and backhand side of the table.Step Threeis learning to hit random forehands. Now your partner puts the ball randomly all over your forehand (or backhand) court, and you have to hit all forehands.Step Fouris learning to play forehands in a game situation. For example, you serve topspin to your partner's forehand, he strokes it back to your forehand, and you smash or hit the forehand aggressively. Or serve into your partner's backhand, and play your forehand down the line from your forehand side to his backhand. Or the same thing, but your forehand from your backhand side to your partner's backhand side.Step Fiveis learning to do the shot at a higher level. For example, you serve topspin to your partner's backhand, he returns to your backhand, and you forehand smash. Or, if you can loop backspin, you can do a drill where you serve backspin, your partner pushes, you loop, your partner blocks, and you smash the forehand. (At the more advanced levels, you might loop both the backspin and the block.)You can do similar practice to develop any stroke as well as footwork. (You should develop strokes and footwork together.) You can also use this principle for developing serves, starting with simple spins, then heavy spins, then heavy and varied spins, then heavy and varied spins with the same motion, then heavy and varied spins from the same motion to all parts of the table, both in direction and depth, and low to the net. When the serve is ready, you practice it with a partner, where you play out the point (or play games), and learn to connect your serve with follow-up attacks. Do enough of this type of practice, and youwillPrevent Poor Play.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1451title: April 15, 2013: Playing the Big Backhand Playerdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:How does one play an opponent with a big backhand? There are several versions of this type of player. Some have big backhand smashes and seem to be able to smash anything from that side. Others don't hit quite so hard but keep coming at you with it. Others have big backhand loops. In each case you are faced with an opponent whose backhand is stronger than yours, and is a constant threat to win the point. You have several options, and you can (and should) use more than one of them.1) DepthCompared to the forehand, the backhand is often a cramped shot because the body is in the way. And so the enemy of the backhand is depth. If you keep the ball deep on the table, few players can attack that ball as strongly as they can off a short ball. This is the most common reason for an opponent with a big backhand - balls that aren't going deep, thereby giving the opponent opportunities for big backhands.(Note that depth is the first item listed, but keeping the ball low isn't even listed as one of your options. That's because it's assumed that you are trying to keep the ball low.The exception - deep, arcing loops with heavy topspin are effective against most big backhands despite being high.)2) Play the ForehandThe most obvious thing is to simply play the forehand side. The problem here is that even with a big backhand player, the forehand might be pretty powerful as well. So figure out early what shots the opponent has trouble with on the forehand, and play those shots there. Often the forehand side isn't as quick as the backhand, and so quick, angle shots there are effective.3) Play the Forehand, Come Back to the BackhandMany players have strong backhands when they are in position. So draw them out of their backhand pocket by going to the forehand first, and then coming back to the backhand. (Ironically, this is also an excellent way to play a player with a big forehand - draw them out to their forehand side, then make them play backhands.)4) Attack FirstIf you have good serve and receive, you can most often get the first attack. There's nothing like a good first attack (again, deep on the table) for stopping any type of attack by the opponent.5) Attack the MiddleMake the opponent move side to side to hit those backhands by playing both wide to the backhand and to the middle. (The middle is the mid-point between forehand and backhand, roughly where the playing elbow is.) This forces the opponent not only to move, but to decide between forehand and backhand. Players with big backhands often favor the backhand even on shots that go somewhat out to the forehand side, and so their "middle" might be toward their forehand side. Find that spot and go for it. The more table the opponent tries to cover with the backhand, the more you can make him move.6) ConsistencyAs long as you keep the ball deep on the table, and perhaps move it around some (wide backhand, middle, wide forehand), a consistent backhand can often beat a more powerful one. Don't try to be quicker or more powerful than the opponent with a big backhand; out-steady him while keeping the ball deep and making him move.7) Changing SpinsFew players have powerful backhands against both backspin and topspin. Find the spin they have the most trouble with, and place it deep on the table. Or go back and forth between deep, spinny loops and deep, heavy pushes to force him to adjust to both.And finally, there's an eighth option.8) Develop your own big backhand===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1441title: April 8, 2013 - Covering and Recovering From the Middledate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most coaches stress that you should place most shots to one of three spots: the wide backhand, the wide forehand, and the middle. The middle is roughly the opponent's playing elbow, the transition point between forehand and backhand. While most players can cover the wide corners reasonably well (unless drawn out of position first), the middle is often far more difficult to cover, even if in position. It also draws the player out of position, often leaving one of the corners open. While it often takes two shots to the corners to be effective (the first shot is mostly to get the player out of position), shots to the middle are effective on the first shot, and often leave the player open to all three spots on the next shot.So how does a player cover these middle shots, and recover for the next shot?How you cover the middle depends on your playing style, but there is a general guideline for most players: If you are rushed or close to the table, favor your backhand. If you have time or are off the table, favor your forehand. (This is especially true if you have a good forehand loop.) But remember these are guidelines. For example, if you have a much stronger backhand, use that whenever possible to cover the middle, and then try to dominate the rest of the rally with your backhand. If you have a much stronger forehand, then perhaps play a step off the table so you aren't rushed, and use that to cover the middle, and then try to dominate the rest of the rally with your forehand.But it's not enough to just cover the middle; you have to be ready for the next shot. There are two possibilities: recovering after a backhand, and recovering after a forehand.If you play a backhand from the middle, then you leave your wide backhand open. If you are relatively close to the table, then you have little time to recover. So the focus here is to follow up by rapidly getting back into position to cover that wide backhand. If you have a strong backhand, then you can take advantage of this situation by often getting two strong backhands in - the first from the middle, and by playing it wide to the opponent's backhand, you likely get a crosscourt return to your backhand, and so get to play a second strong backhand. (In fact, you can keep doing this, locking up the opponent in a backhand-to-backhand duel, if your backhand is stronger. But don't just go to the backhand - also attack the middle, and when you see an opening, or if the opponent is weak on that side, the wide forehand.)But here's the problem - after hitting a backhand from the middle, if you rush too quickly to cover against a shot to the wide backhand, you might inadvertently leave the forehand side open, and a smart player will follow his shot to your backhand with an attack or quick shot there So your best response after your backhand from the middle is to move back to cover for the backhand, but come to a stop before the opponent hits his next shot. It's better to be slightly out of position but in a ready stance as the opponent hits his next shot than moving into position as he does so.If you go to your opponent's middle, and he covers with a backhand, then watch to see how he recovers. Most often he'll be open on the next shot on one of the wide corners, and it is your job to see if he leaves the wide backhand open, or covers it so quickly he leaves the wide forehand open. If not sure, there's a simple solution - go to the middle again!If you play a forehand from the middle, then you leave the wide forehand open. But if you are at least a step or two off the table, you have time to cover for it. In fact, if you are a good forehand player with good footwork, then you very much want to play forehands from the middle of the table, since you really get two for the price of one since you will likely get a second forehand, and you likely can end the point with one of these forehands.But this often depends on the strength and (more importantly) the depth of your first forehand from the middle. If it is weak or lands short, then it is easy for your opponent to attack aggressively, and in this case your wide forehand is often open. But just as with the backhand, if you try to cover that side too quickly, you'll leave the wide backhand open. So again, come to a stop and get into a ready position before the opponent hits the ball.If you go to your opponent's middle, and he covers with a forehand, then watch to see how he recovers. Most often he'll be open on the next shot on one of the wide corners, and it is your job to see if he leaves the wide forehand open, or covers it so quickly he leaves the wide backhand open. If not sure, just as before there's a simple solution - go to the middle again! But the danger here is you may let a forehand-dominant player play his forehand over and over from the middle, which is almost always a mistake. If the opponent is looking to play a second forehand from the middle, then go after the corners.It's a cat and mouse game, where each player is trying to get the initiative, either by attacking the middle or attacking from the middle. If one player can draw the opponent out of position by going to the middle, and then attack an open wide corner, then he's won this cat and mouse game. If the other player makes a strong shot from the middle and follows it with another, then he has won.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1423title: April 1, 2013 - The Many Ways to Receive a Short Backspin Servedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:I am often left in open-mouthed astonishment when watching matches as players will return short backspin serves the same way, with simple long pushes to the opponent's backhand, over and Over and OVER!!! There is little attempt to vary these returns or do much of anything to mess up the server. And yet they seem surprised that the server is ready for these simple pushes, usually with a big third-ball loop attack. If the opponent serves and pushes, then perhaps pushing the serve back long over and over will work. But that's mostly at the lower levels. If you want to reach the higher levels, you have to do a bit more with the receive.If the serve is long, it's a bit more simple - just loop the serve, forehand or backhand. If you don't loop, at least play aggressive, since a passive return of a deep serve is easy for the server to attack, since he has more time then off a short serve. (Aggressive usually means a topspin return, i.e. a drive or loop, but it can also be an aggressive push.) The same is true of a short sidespin or topspin serve (which is somewhat rare at the lower levels) - you should flip it.However, against a short backspin serve, you can't loop, and flips are a little trickier. But you have more options to mess up the server, if you only use them. So what should you do against a short backspin serve? There are three main possibilities, but with countless variations.Push long. Do this to the wide backhand or wide forehand, and sometimes at the opponent's middle (the playing elbow) against a two-winged attacker, so he has to decide between forehand and backhand, and move to do so. Push quick, heavy, low, deep, and wide, with disguised placement. If you do some of this well, but some poorly, your push will be poor; it's better to do all six decently. (Here's anarticleon this.) Experiment with pushing with sidespin, especially a sidespin that breaks away from the opponent on his wide backhand side. A sudden quick push to an opponent's wide forehand is often a free winner since they get this so rarely.Push short. This stops the opponent from looping. But don't just push short; sometimes aim to push short one way, and go the other. Top players finesse their pushes so sometimes they drop them short at the point of the net closest to their contact point, other times at angles to the forehand or backhand. Often the best move is to fake a short push to the opponent's stronger side against short balls, then go the other way.Flip. This can be done forehand or backhand. These days more and more players attack short serves with abackhand banana flip, using it even against short serves to the forehand. Focus on consistency and control, and save the flip kills for serves that actually pop up at least slightly, or (at higher levels) where you really read the serve well. Learn to aim one way and go the other way at the last second.Never forget that your purpose in returning a serve is to mess up your opponent. You don't do this by being predictable with passive returns; you do this with unpredictable and effective returns.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1410title: March 25, 2013 - Importance of Constant Competitiondate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One thing that always stands out from years of coaching is that those who play in tournaments regularly almost always improve faster than those who do not. There are players who train and train, but do not get the constant feedback you get from playing in tournaments, and so the training doesn't always transfer into improvement. Also, players who do not play tournaments regularly are not "tournament tough," and so do not play as well as players who compete in tournaments regularly. (Note - when I talk about playing in tournaments, this includes league matches as well, as long as you are playing a lot of different players there.)Why is it so important to compete regularly, as opposed to just constant training? The constant training improves your game, but you also need the constant competition to learn to compete against different players, for feedback on your game, and to become mentally stronger under pressure situations. It also gives you incentive to practice.Some would argue that you get the same thing by playing practice matches against players at your club. While this is partially true, there are two problems here. First, you are playing the same players over and over. You get used to their serves, their receives, and their rallying shots. Then you go to a tournament, and find that everybody has different serves, receives, and rallying shots. You'll never face everything, and even if you did, you'll never get used to everything. But what playing different players regularly does is develop thehabitof adjusting to new players. A player who plays lots of tournaments will adjust far more quickly to a new serve or other shot than a player who only plays the same players, and so isn't used to adapting to new things. The constant feedback from playing different players also shows a player what he needs to practice.The psychological aspect might be even more important. Playing a practice match at the club just isn't the same as playing under pressure at a tournament, where the results count. To many, just the thought of blowing rating points can turn ingrained techniques into shivering jellyfish!A third aspect is the competitive aspect, as in players who compete have stronger incentive when they train. A player who competes constantly knows what works and what doesn't work in serious competition, and so has incentive to turn the strengths into overpowering ones, and to work on weaknesses that are exposed in tournaments. Knowing you have another tournament coming up gives them a timely reason to train to excel, while those who don't have anything coming up have more of a mental battle to push themselves to excel.You might want to take time off from tournaments for a time when you are working on something new that is central to your game. Competing when your game is in transition is often a mistake, and can lead to falling back on old habits you are trying to overcome. For example, if you were mostly a hitter but are trying to incorporate more looping into your game, you might want to focus on training until you feel your looping is ready - but once you reach that stage, where you can confidently loop in a real match, then you should get back to constant competition.Think of tournaments and practice as the Yin and Yang of table tennis. They feed off each other, and one without the other is like a Yinless Yang or a Yangless Yin. Go for both, where you practice for tournaments, and use tournaments as feedback and incentive for practice, and watch your game soar.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1396title: March 18, 2013 - Dummy Loopsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:In this modern game of topspin, many players battle to see who can get more topspin on the ball, with more speed and more consistency. After all, isn't that what tends to win games? Yet you might want to consider whether you want to join in this escalating topspin battle every single point. Why not throw an occasional changeup at them - a "dummy loop" - and watch them mess up? Go for less spin, and mess up your opponent's consistency!A dummy loop is a loop that looks like it has a lot of topspin, but is not very spinny. You execute the shot almost like any other loop, except you start with your wrist cocked up, so there's no natural wrist snap, so little whipping action to add to the topspin. By using a full motion, and exaggerating the rest of the stroke (especially the follow-through), it looks like you've done a normal loop, yet the ball comes out relatively dead, causing havoc for your opponent. It's usually done against backspin, where you are both close to the table (so the opponent has less time to recognize the lack of spin), and where the opponent has a reasonable expectation of extreme topspin (since you are continuing the spin when you loop against backspin, using the incoming spin to add to your own).Some players dummy loop by contacting the ball closer to the handle, while contacting the ball closer to the tip for maximum spin. It's a little trickier this way, but can be even harder for an opponent to see the difference. How many opponents can tell whether your loop contact was near the tip or handle?A key point of all dummy loops - do the shot with a full swing, with full enthusiasm, as if you were really going for your spinniest loop. If you hold back on spin by holding back on the stroke itself, the opponent will easily see that. It's also important to keep the ball deep. That way, if the opponent does reacts to the lack of spin, he probably won't be able to hammer a winner off it, which is much easier to do against a ball that lands short. Even a ball with light topspin can be effective if it goes deep.Against a primarily defensive player, where there's little risk of them effectively attacking your dummy loop, you should constantly vary your spin from heavy topspin to dead dummy loops. The change of spin will mess up a chopper or blocker more than just extreme topspin.It's fun watching an opponent block into the net, and stare at his paddle in disbelief!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1388title: March 11, 2013 - Practicing for the Big Matchesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:There are two key differences between practice and important matches:PsychologicalandVariation.Psychological. There is little pressure in practice, and so players are loose, both mentally and physically. However, once a game begins, it's easy to get nervous and tighten up.RELAX!Of course, that's easier said than done, especially in a tournament or league match. A great way to prepare for this is to drill as if it were a match. Even if you are doing a simple side-to-side footwork drill, think of it as a match, where you must outlast your opponent, in this case your practice partner. Table tennis is a competitive sport, and to prepare for competition you must do competition.Which leads to another way of preparing for important matches - practice matches. There's a lot less pressure when you play practice matches, but remember that practice is just that - practice. And so they are a perfect time to practice your mental game. Pretend it's a serious match. Before the point begins, blank out your mind, and just let the shots happen. (Between points is when you think about tactics; once the point begins, you have to just let them happen naturally.) Don't worry about winning or losing practice games; just play your game until it becomes comfortable. Then do the same in tournaments and leagues, where you also shouldn't worry about winning or losing, which only puts more pressure on yourself. The more you do this in practice the easier it will be to do so in important matches.Always remember that you have your best chance of winning if you don't worry about winning. If your goal is instead to play your best, you will maximize your chances of winning.Variation. There is much less variation in practice drills than in a game. Most practice drills are somewhat predictable, and so you get balls you are comfortable with. For example, you might do a drill where you serve backspin, your opponent pushes it back to your backhand, and you loop (forehand or backhand). The range of variation in the pushes you'll be looping (amount of spin, speed, height, depth and placement) may be rather small. Drills like this are good to develop your shots, as are pattern drills where you practice footwork.But in a game, when you serve backspin, your opponent's pushes will vary more. He may push to your forehand or backhand, or short, or he may even attack the push. He may vary the spin more. So you usually have to deal with a lot more variation in a game than in practice, and so it's more difficult to prepare for or react to the many different returns.How do you learn to react to variation in games? By incorporating that variation into your practice routines. Do drills where your opponent varies his returns. For example, the drill might be where you serve backspin, your partner pushes deep anywhere, and you loop. Or your partner may have the choice of pushing short to the forehand or long to the backhand. Or he may just push anywhere, long or short. When you are comfortable against all these, then you may go for bust, and have your partner return serves any way he wants, including attacking them. (Perhaps serve short so he can't loop, and serve low so he can't flip too effectively.)All drills can be turned into random drills that incorporate variation. For example, instead of hitting forehand to forehand (or forehand loop to block), once you are warmed up have your practice partner move you around randomly on your forehand side. Or have your partner hit the ball randomly to your forehand or backhand (or to anywhere on the table), and you return each shot to one spot. Or do drills that combine variation with pattern play. For example, your partner may alternate between one shot to your backhand, and one random shot that goes anywhere.Of course, the ultimate drill that incorporates all variations is a practice match. Play them like tournament matches (though sometimes you should focus on something that needs practice), and they will prepare you for the big matches. Ultimately, to play in games as well as you play in practice, you need to play lots of games - but only after you have really practiced against variable shots in practice.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1373title: March 4, 2013 - Should You Use a Neutral Grip?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When developing your shots, you want to use a neutral grip; otherwise, your strokes might not develop properly. (This is for shakehanders.) A neutral grip makes proper strokes more natural. You might be tempted to use a slight forehand or backhand grip as you develop your stroking techniques, but in the long run, this will hurt you.What is a neutral, forehand and backhand grip? If the thinnest part of your wrist lines up with the blade (so the blade and the back of your wrist both aim in the same direction), then you have a neutral grip. If you tilt the top of the blade away from you, you have a backhand grip. If you tilt the top of the racket toward you, you have a forehand grip. (If you aren't sure what a shakehands grip is, google "table tennis shakehands grip pictures," and a zillion examples will show up.)However, a neutral grip is not necessarily the way to maximize your play at the intermediate and advanced levels. It's a tradeoff. At the higher levels, the strokes are already well developed, and so experimenting with the grip won't hurt a player's strokes much.I used a neutral grip roughly the first decade I played. Then I used a slight backhand grip for roughly a decade. Then I went to a slight forehand grip for roughly the past decade. A backhand grip tends to favor backhand blocking and backhand looping, and gives a natural forehand sidespin loop (so it hooks left for a right-hander). A forehand grip tends to favor backhand hitting and forehand looping, and gives a better inside-out loop on the forehand (so the ball curves to the right for a right-hander).===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1367title: February 25, 2013 - Should You Hit or Loop the Backhand?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Should You Hit or Loop the Backhand?This depends partly on your level. Beginners should learn to hit their backhands first. However, it’s also important for players should learn to loop early on, so as to develop good habits. So it might be a good idea for beginners to learn early on how to open with a backhand loop against backspin, followed by backhand hitting against the incoming block and the rest of the rally. A backhand loop against backspin, followed by a backhand hit against an incoming block, is a very strong combo.I do recommend learning to backhand loop against backspin. It’s good to be able to hit against backspin, especially against a short ball, but a backhand loop is more consistent and takes control of the rally, as well as setting up your follow-up attack. And it's better than just pushing over and over, which gives the opponent the chance to attack and take the initiative.At the intermediate level, backhand loops are mostly done against backspin. However, as players approach the higher levels, more and more players can backhand loop over and over during a rally.Backhand looping over and over in a rally takes a lot of practice. On the forehand side, the ball is taken from the side, so you have a large hitting zone. (“Hitting” here means where you contact the ball, not a backhand hit itself.) On the backhand side, the body is in the way, so there’s a much smaller hitting zone. Contrary to what some believe, backhand loopers need great footwork to get their hitting zone to overlap with the incoming ball. The faster the ball is coming at you, the more difficult it is, which is why it’s generally easier to backhand loop against backspin than against an incoming topspin or block (which usually come at you faster).At the highest levels, backhand looping dominates. USA Team Member Sean Lonergan wrote in his blog at the 2008 Worlds, “The Backhand Hit is Dead.” At the world-class level, nearly every player loops on the backhand side. (Even penholders backhand loop now, using reverse penhold backhands.) The extreme topspin in a loop gives the shot consistency, allows you to loop with great speed as well as spin, and puts your opponent in a difficult position. A backhand hit doesn’t have as much topspin and so there’s less margin for error.So if you are aspiring to be a world-class player, then you would want to learn to backhand loop over and over. However, if you are aspiring to, say, win a senior event or reach a strong level that's somewhat lower than world-class, then you might want to focus on backhand hitting, while learning to backhand loop against backspin. (If you develop a good backhand loop against backspin, then later on you can learn to loop against topspin as well.) You might want to develop a good backhand loop against backspin and follow that with a backhand hit. (Here's a Tip of the Week on that - "The Backhand Loop and Hit One-Two Punch.")So what is the answer to your question on whether you should hit or loop on the backhand? It’s your choice, based on your abilities, goals, and preferences.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1352title: February 18, 2013 - Learn to Play Defensedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:It’s a common mistake for beginning players to develop their attacks, but not their defense. You need both. The problem comes about because a beginning player usually starts out learning to hit forehands and backhands, and once developed, these are primarily offensive shots. These are important shots when attacking, but what about when the opponent attacks?Against many attacks, you can counter-attack. However, this can lead to some rather wild, low percentage shots. A little defense would be the better option. So it's important to learn to defend, such as blocking.It doesn't have to be passive blocking; you can block aggressively. Take the ball quick off the bounce and quick-hit the ball to the opponent's wide corners or middle (the transition point between forehand and backhand), and keep moving him around these three spots, and you'll often force a miss or weaker shot you can attack. The most common way to beat an attacker is to attack first, but if you can block, you take much of that advantage away, and turn your defense into a transition back to your own attack.Many table tennis drills involve one player attacking, the other blocking. When you are the blocker in such a drill, take this just as seriously as you would when you are attacking. Many players treat drills as something where the two players take turns drilling.Never!!!A drill is a two-way thing, and whatever your opponent is doing, you are drilling against it. You learn to block by blocking, and the best time to do that is by focusing on your blocking in drills. Work on precision - if you learn to block the ball accurately and consistently in drills, this will show up in matches as well. You can also practice advanced variations, such as topspin blocks (i.e. mini-loops), dead blocks, and chop and sidespin blocks.You can also learn other defensive shots, such as lobbing, fishing and chopping. Lobbing is a high defensive topspin shot, usually done off a smash. It's often a desperation tactic, but in the hands of an expert, it's a valuable way to win a few points that otherwise would be lost. Fishing is a lower defensive topspin shot, where you keep the ball roughly one to four feet high. Fishing defense is central to many players' games, especially loopers, who play off the table and need an off-table shot to defend with. Fishing and lobbing, done at the higher levels (where the ball goes deep with topspin and sometimes sidespin), are basically just defensive loops. They are a bit more advanced than blocking, but if you have mobility off the table, they are valuable shots to have. Fishing and lobbing tend to go together as most players who do one do the other as well.Chopping is a more specialized defense, and while I don’t recommend most offensive players to back off the table and try to chop down an opponent, it’s valuable to be able to throw in a chop now and then, especially on the backhand when you are out of position. Plus, of course, many players play a chopping style, in which case chopping is central to their game.Note that I don’t include pushing as a defensive shot. A defensive shot is done against an incoming offensive shot. A push is more a sparring backspin shot against an incoming non-offensive shot, such as a backspin or no-spin push or serve. If done poorly, it’s a defensive shot, but that’s because it’s done poorly. It should be more of a neutral shot.Many years ago Cheng Yinghua (former Chinese team member, once the #1 player in the U.S. for a decade as he won Men's Singles at four Nationals and two Opens while making the 2000 Olympic team) said that the biggest weakness of most top U.S. players were their fundamentals, in particular their defense. When these players attacked against the best players in the U.S. at the time - Cheng, David Zhuang, Ilija Lupulesku - they faced great defense (blocking by the first two, fishing and lobbing by Lupulesku), and struggled to win a point. When these three attacked, opponent after opponent would crumble due to their lack of defensive skills This is true at all levels. So learn to play defense, and make your opponents be the ones who crumble when the other player attacks.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1344title: February 11, 2013 - Winning with Backspin for the Non-Chopperdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:You don't need to be a chopper to win with backspin, even in this modern age of topspin. Backspin will always have its place, when used properly. Of course, even attackers often serve backspin, hoping for a pushed return (backspin) that they can loop. However, when should an attacking player use backspin in a rally?Backspin Against Topspin: Chopping (which is backspin against an incoming topspin) can be tricky, especially with a fast attacking racket, and so usually an attacker will use backspin only against an incoming backspin, i.e. a push. There is one main exception. If you are forced off the table, and attack from the wide forehand, an opponent may quick-block to your backhand. Ideally, you can attack this as well, either backhand hitting or looping. However, if you are out of position and have to reach for the ball, a better answer might be a backhand chop. This keeps you in the rally, gives you time to get back into the point, and it may throw off the opponent's timing.Short Pushes: If you push short (so the ball would bounce twice on the opponent's side of the table if given the chance), then your opponent can't loop it. If you keep it low, it's very difficult to attack effectively, and will usually result in a pushed return that you can attack. Key to this is keeping the ball very low to the net. Don't just dink the ball back; brush it back lightly with backspin, which will make it easier to keep the ball low and short. Learn to change directions at the last second, dropping the ball short to the middle, left, or right. Short pushes are especially effective if you push both long and short, so the opponent never knows what's coming.Long Pushes: There are many ways an attacker can win with long pushes. The key to long pushes is to push quick, low, heavy, deep, and at wide angles (or to the middle against some two-winged players). You should also often aim one way, and at the last second change directions. (So aim to the backhand and go quick to the forehand, or vice versa.) Here are some other ways to win with long pushes:A quick push rushes an opponent, forcing mistakes and weak shots.Heavy backspin gives many opponents trouble, forcing mistakes and weak shots.Against an opponent who doesn't attack backspin well and often pushes (such as many choppers or blockers), pushing allows you to pick and choose which shot you want to attack.They force an opponent to drop their racket and shoulder to lift the ball, throwing off their timing not only on that shot, but on the next shot.If an opponent attacks a push to the backhand with the forehand, you can quick-block to the often open wide forehand - and if they get to that, you can quick-block again to the wide backhand. Also, after looping from the backhand corner, many opponents anticipate a block to the wide forehand, so a quick block right back to the backhand catches them. The same tactics often work against a player who opens with a backhand loop from the backhand side.A quick push to the wide forehand can catch an opponent off guard, and if he does attack it, you can then quick-block to the wide backhand. If he moves quickly to cover that, a second quick-block to the wide forehand can catch him moving the wrong way.They slow down play, thereby throwing off an opponent's timing.Happy Backspinning!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1333title: February 4, 2013 - Super Spinny Slow Loopsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Some of us remember the incredible topspins of U.S. Team Member Rick Seemiller (brother of Dan) back in the 1980s. He didn't have great speed on his forehand loops. What he did have was more topspin than anyone in the U.S., and probably in the world. Even world-class players commented on this. When faced with this very slow, arcing ball that exploded off your racket, invariably going off, many an opponent called it "unreturnable." Rick pulled off a huge upset over world #1 Mikael Appelgren, the best counterlooper in the world at the time, who over and over counterlooped off the end and then just stared at his racket in disbelief.The game has evolved since then, with super-looping sponges, and players tend to go for as much speed as spin. But there's nothing like a slow but spinny loop to mess up an opponent's block or counterloop. You can learn the shot at any age - I've seen players learn to do this in their sixties.Another big advantage of the slow loop is it gives you time to get back into position after the shot. You can do a slow forehand loop from the backhand side, and move back into position before the opponent can quick-block to the wide forehand. Also, the slowness of the shot means that most block returns will tend to come back more slowly, since the opponent can't use your own speed against you. This gives you even more time for the next shot, as well as a softer ball to attack.To do this shot you need a sheet of grippy inverted sponge, preferably one of the modern super-looping sponges. The shot is usually done against backspin, so you can use backspin in creating your own topspin. To execute the shot, it is important to let the ball drop farther down than usual, to below the table's surface, perhaps as low as your knees. Bend your knees more than usual, and drop your playing shoulder and playing racket very low, with the racket tip pointing to the ground. (If you have knee or other leg problems, you can execute the shot almost as well by just dropping the racket very low from the shoulder.) Then whip the racket upward and forward, with a big wrist snap just before contact.Contact the ball by just barely skimming it. At first you might feel like you'll go off the end since much of your stroke is up, but if you barely graze the ball, it'll have little forward motion, and so the topspin and gravity will pull it down. Arc the ball a little higher than usual, making it go deep on the table.You can also do the shot on the backhand. Again, let the ball drop down more than usual, stroke more upward, and just skim the ball.Note that there's a world of difference between a spinny loop that lands short (easy to attack if the opponent doesn't hesitate) and one that lands deep (very tricky to do anything with). Depth is key!Done properly, your opponent will face a very spinny ball, coming at him relatively slowly (so he can't use your own speed against you), and deep on the table. If he blocks, he has to punch the ball from deep on the court against a lot more topspin than he's used to. If he counterloops, he'll likely go off the end since he's not used to such a slow, spinny ball. It can be done, but it's not easy except perhaps at the highest levels.Happy Topspinning!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1321title: January 28, 2013 - Holding Back on Servesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Suppose you have a tricky serve that gives your opponent all sorts of problems. But suppose it's also one of those serves that he can get used to, and only works by either surprise or by the opponent's not being used to it. Should you hold back on this serve for key points in the match?To start with, you won't really know if the serve is effective unless you actually try it out against an opponent. Sometimes you may know from previous matches. Either way, you should use it early on to establish whether the serve is effective. If the serve is not effective, then you know not to use it later on. If it is effective, you get to use it early in a game, and then come back to it several more times, including near the end if necessary. If you do need to come back to it again near the end of a close game, imagine where you'd be if you hadn't used the serve early on, perhaps more than once?The idea behind holding back on a serve is that 1) if you use it too often, the opponent will get used to it, and so 2) hold back on it until you reach a key point. The thinking is that if you use it early in a game, and that games ends up not being close, then you've "wasted" that serve.There is logic behind the above, and yet many players way overdo this, holding back on their best serves - i.e. some of their best weapons - except when it's close. This is like a looper not looping until it's close, or a hitter waiting until it's close before hitting.If you have a serve that really bothers an opponent, use it regularly in rotation with your other serves, and put yourself in a position where you use the serve at the end of games to win that game, not just when you are down (and where you might "waste" the serve anyway if your comeback falls short). If you are in a competitive match, and can win one "free" game on the strength of one serve, use it! And don't kid yourself into thinking that your opponent will magically become strong against this serve as long as you use it somewhat sparingly and with some variations. His returns may become more effective, but that's true of any shot you may throw at him.If you do have one serve that really gives the opponent trouble, try to use variations of it to keep him guessing throughout. The more you vary it, the harder it will be for the opponent to get used to it, and so you can use the serve more often.It's better to use your winning shots (and serves) and win then to hold back on them and hope to come back and win with them at the end.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1311title: January 21, 2013 - Backhand Banana Flipdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The backhand flip has rapidly become the dominant receive against short serves at the world-class level. The flip (usually called a flick in Europe and Asia) is a short stroke where a player steps and attacks a short ball, forehand or backhand. What makes the backhand flip so dominant is that since the table is in the way, it is difficult to generate topspin against short balls except with the wrist, and it is easier to use wrist over the table with the backhand than the forehand. It was just a few years ago that players like China's Ma Long showed at tournaments, backhand flipping even short serves to the forehand, considered a no-no by most coaches for many years since it put you in an extreme backhand position and so not ready to dominate the table with the forehand on the next shot. Ma Long and others showed this wasn't true - they'd step back quickly and rip the next ball with their forehand.This wasn't really new historically. Viktor Barna of Hungary won five World Men's Titles doing with a hardbat in the 1930s, often stepping around his forehand side to attack both short and long balls with his backhand. In the 1970s players like Tibor Klampar and Anton Stipancic attacked short serves over and over with wristy and topspinny backhand flips.However, players like Ma Long (world #1 for all of 2010 and eight months of 2011) and Zhang Jike (current World Men's Champion) have taken it to the next level in terms of the amount and variation of spin generated, and thereby its effectiveness. A major problem with a flip is that against a heavy backspin you need to lift the ball up, and to do so you need to generate upward racket speed. How do you do this when you can't backswing down against a short ball, because the table is in the way? By backswinging to the side, and using that swing to build up momentum to generate both topspin and sidespin on the flip. Because the stroke starts from the side and curves in toward the ball, the stroke's path is the shape of a banana, and so it is called a banana flip. It's much easier to lift a short backspin ball this way then by trying to meet the backspin straight on with pure topspin.Here's a video featuring Ma Long's banana flip(3:25). There's Chinese commentary starting at 1:29, but you don't need that to see how he does the shot. Watch how he draws the racket off to the side and then essentially loops the ball with his wrist, often doing so against short balls to the forehand. Contact is a grazing motion, usually just after the top of the bounce against backspin, more at the top of the bounce against sidespin or topspin. Also note the placement of the shot - usually at wide angles, though aggressive ones can go at the opponent's middle (the elbow, the transition point between forehand and backhand).The shot is especially effective when combined with short and long pushes against backspin serves (though can also do this against no-spin and sidespin serves, even topspin serves, by aiming low or even chopping down on the ball). At the higher levels, being able to flip aggressively or drop the ball short against short serves causes havoc with an opponent as they have to hang back to deal with the flip while moving in to handle the short push. If you just flip every ball, a good player knows the ball is coming out and can wait for it and loop or hit it far more easily. Mixing in deep pushes is also effective in messing up an opponent's timing.A key aspect of the banana flip is that it also has sidespin, which messes with an opponent's timing. This is especially true if the incoming ball has sidespin that they can add to, such as against a forehand pendulum serve (if both players are righties or lefties). In this case, the incoming sidespin matches the sidespin from a banana flip, and so it's like looping against backspin, with the flip just adding to the topspin. If the incoming sidespin is the reverse, it's like looping against a topspin, with the spin rebounding off your rubber like a mini-counterloop.The best way to develop a banana flip is to (you guessed it) practice it. Find someone with good short serves, and have them serve over and over and you flip them. Ideally, have a bucket of balls so the server can just serve over and over, grabbing the next ball to serve without playing out the point. When the bucket is empty, pick up the balls and repeat. This is the best way to practicealltypes of receive, and yet few players do this, relying instead on practicing receive only in matches, which is like learning to hit drives and loops only by practicing them in matches. Not very smart. So get that bucket of balls and practice your banana flips (and other receives), and maybe someday you'll dominate like Ma Long.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1305title: January 14, 2013 - Learning to Counterloopdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Once you get past serve & receive, the basic rallying shot at the higher levels is counterlooping. Some do it from way off the table, others from close to the table (often taking the ball on the rise), while most take it somewhere in between, sometime after the top of the bounce (around table level), from five to eight feet back. It's mostly done on the forehand side, but some do it on the backhand side as well - especially the best players in the world, who often backhand counterloop off the bounce. (Spectators often don't even realize it's a counterloop as it happens so quickly, and think it's just a backhand block.) For this article, unless noted otherwise, I'm mostly talking about forehand counterlooping.Not everyone needs to counterloop, not unless you are aspiring to the higher levels. If you have good serve & receive (and so can get the first attack in, forcing your opponent to either defend or go for a risky counterloop or some other difficult counter-attack) or have good defense (such as blocking or chopping), then counterlooping may be an unneeded luxury. But at the highest levels, essentially everyone counterloops. Blocking is often the last resort, as the best loopers overpower blockers with space-aged looping strokes and equipment. Even choppers almost always look for chances to counterloop.At the recent USA Nationals I watched two rival junior players go at it. The previous time they'd played it had been rather close. This time the player I was coaching relentlessly counterlooped whenever the other player looped, turning the opponent into a blocker. The counter-looping player won easily. It wasn't a matter of just choosing to counterloop; the junior had been trained to do so with relentless counterlooping drills, and so when faced with aggressive loops, there was no hesitation; he counterlooped, and continued the barrage each point until the point was over.Keys to a good counterloop include good technique (see a coach and watch the top players); light on feet (which is a habit you can develop); and good sponge. Even developing players should use modern sponges developed with looping in mind, with a slower blade until they are advanced. The paradigm used to be that developing players should use thinner and slower sponges to develop their strokes, and while I believe that was true before, I don't believe that is true any longer. Using such sponges simply limits the player from developing at a more advanced level. By using modern looping sponges, players find looping and counterlooping more natural, and so it becomes central to their games.I'm not going to go into the finer points of looping or counterlooping technique here; see a coach for that. Instead, let's talk about what you can do to develop your counterloop.First and foremost is the obvious: practice counterlooping. Find a partner or coach who can counterloop. Stand a bit off the table - perhaps five feet - and toss the ball up and loop it directly to your opponent's side of the table. This gets you right into counterlooping, forehand to forehand. Before you can do anything else, you must be proficient at this. One hint - don't try to meet the opponent's incoming topspin straight on. Instead, hook the ball by hitting a bit on the outside of the ball, creating a sidespin that breaks to your left and away from your opponent on his forehand side (for righties). This not only makes your counterloop more consistent, it gives you better angles, forcing your opponent to cover that much more table. If you watch world-class players, you'll see that they almost always counterloop with sidespin. Be aggressive in putting your own spin on the ball; overpower the incoming spin with your own spin, mostly topspin.When you are pretty good at straight counterlooping, try the next variation: this time serve straight topspin (and have your partner do the same) so you can start by looping off a topspin ball from close to the table, and then back up and start counterlooping.As you practice, you'll get a feel for what type of counterlooper you are - off-table, mid-distance, or close to table. Learn all three, but generally specialize in one. At the highest levels, players try to counterloop from as close to the table as possible, but at the speeds they play they are still forced to back up.You can also get a coach or partner to feed you multiball, where the coach loops the ball directly after tossing the ball out of his hand. This allows him to move you around as you work on counterlooping and footwork.Many players never practice anything beyond this type of straight counterlooping. But think about it - in a game, many or most loops start from backspin, which often have more topspin (because they are adding to the backspin already on the ball), come at you from a closer contact point (so you have less time to react), often have a sharper arc (due to the extra topspin), and force you to counterloop from relatively close to the table (since they don't usually bounce out as much as a loop against topspin). Plus you don't know where the ball is going, unlike in the counterlooping drills explained above, where you are going forehand to forehand. Here are some more advanced variations so you can get more match-like practice.First, if you have a partner or coach feeding you multiball loops, have him vary the placement, so sometimes you forehand counterloop, other times you have to use your backhand. (Either block, hit, or counterloop. Or, if you are a chopper/looper, chop the backhand.)Second, work on counterlooping against a loop against backspin. Have your partner serve backspin, you push long, and the server loops, and you counterloop, and both players continue to counterloop. (Or, if your partner isn't a counterlooper, he can switch to blocking after the first loop against backspin.) This gives you practice counterlooping against a loop against backspin. It also gives your partner practice looping against backspin.But there is an even better way to rapidly develop your counterloop against a loop off backspin, using an adjusted version of multiball. Your partner will need a box of balls handy. Just as above, he serve and loops against backspin, and you counterloop. Only you do not play out the point. As soon as the server loops, he reaches for the next ball. So the server serve and loops over and over, and the receiver pushes and counterloops over and over. By doing this you can rapid-fire practice over and over your counterloop against a loop off backspin. And the server gets great rapid-fire practice looping against backspin!) As an added bonus, the receiver should work on his long push - don't make it easy for the server. Push quick off the bounce, heavy, low, deep, and well angled. (But for this drill, always push to the same spot.You can also do this drill where the server loops to your backhand, and you can either backhand counterloop, hit, or block. You can also have the server alternate, looping one to the forehand, one to the backhand.When you are proficient at this drill, there are two variations that will bring you to an even higher level. Now have the server serve & loop to one of two spots - either the forehand or backhand. (Or perhaps the wide forehand or wide backhand.) This forces you to make a quick reaction decision, just as you would in a match. Make sure your first move is the right one - don't anticipate, just respond to the ball coming off the opponent's racket, or a split second before if you see where it's going.The final variation is to have the server loop anywhere on the table, including at your middle.  When you are proficient at this, able to counterloop on the forehand, and counterloop, hit, or block on the backhand (depending on your style and the incoming ball), and able to cover the ball to the middle (forehand or backhand, depending on your style and foot speed), you will be ready to do this in a match. And then you'll be able to turn past rivals into blockers that you can overpower.One last tip: No Guts, No Glory. If you don't use this shot regularly in matches (whether it's practice, league, or tournaments), then you won't develop the shot.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1293title: January 7, 2013 - Six Great Rallying Tacticsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:I've noticed over years of coaching in matches that the large majority of opponents are most vulnerable to one of six types of rallying tactics. These are tactics once you are into a topspin rally, so we're not looking at serve and receive here, though of course you can use that to set up these rallying tactics. Here they are, in rough order of frequency.Forehand, then backhand. This is against two types of players. The first is a player who is quick to attack with the forehand from the backhand side, but has a weaker backhand. You go to the forehand first to draw him out to that side, and then you come back to their weaker backhand side. The key is that you choose the ball you let him have on the forehand side and are ready to counter that ball back to the backhand. The second type is a player who is strong on both wings, but weaker on the backhand once pulled out of position by going to their forehand. These are what I call "pocket players," who can rally or attack forever when in position, but whose level drops dramatically once out of that comfortable pocket.Relentlessly go after middle. This is against a player who is good on both wings, but doesn't cover the middle well. Players like this are usually either tall (and so have a bigger middle) or lack mobility. Many opponents mistakenly go after the corners against these players, which they are very good against. Against a player who mostly covers the middle with the backhand a good tactic is to move the ball back and forth between wide backhand and middle, with sudden attacks to the forehand.Pin them on backhand. This is against a player with a weaker backhand who doesn't use the forehand from the backhand side very often. The tactic is to keep going wide and deep to the backhand with quick, aggressive shots. The goal is to force a weak ball from their weak side you can put away. You can also go after the middle, especially if they try to cover it with their backhand.In and out. This is against players who either soft loop or fish over and over from off the table. Often they are two-winged players who can topspin forever if you keep hitting the ball out to them. Instead, block the ball soft to bring them in, then attack out at them. Use the diagonals - block soft to the forehand, then hard to backhand, or vice versa.Go after forehand. Some players simply have weak forehands, and can't do much there even if they know the ball is going there. This is especially true of some players who greatly favor the backhand and have limited mobility to cover that wide forehand. When you go after their forehand, they have difficulty, and they are hoping you will go back to their backhands, or at least to their middle where they can also use their backhand. Rarely do so.It's complicated. This is against a player who changes his playing style in the middle of a game, and so sometimes one of the categories above fits, other times he switches to another category. The most common example is the player who switches between a two-winged attack (but weak in middle) and an all-out forehand attack (but weak at wide corners, especially if you go to the wide forehand and then come back to the backhand). Be aware of their changes so you can apply the appropriate counter-tactic. Remember that when they change tactics, they are often going to their secondary game (i.e. weaker game) because your tactics were working against their primary game. If you play smart, the odds are they will be even more tactically vulnerable with their secondary game.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1287title: December 31, 2012 - Balance Throughout the Strokedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:You should be able to smash or loop at near full power without going off balance. Top players can play great shots in rapid succession because they are always balanced, which leads to a rapid recover for the next shot. When you go off balance, even slightly, you cannot recover quickly for the next shot. There are two times when players tend to go off balance: either when moving to the ball or when following through.When moving to the ball, if you keep your weight somewhere between your feet, you can stay balanced. If you instead lean or reach toward the ball, you go off balance as your weight goes over just one foot or even beyond. To see this, stand in a ready position. Lean to your right (or left). Now try to move to your right (or left) - see how difficult it is? Your first move needs to be a step, not a lean.The second place where players often go off balance is when they follow through too much to the side, especially with the forehand. If a righty has a big follow through to his left, he'll be off balance and unable to recover for the next shot. Instead, imagine a pole going through your head, and try to rotate in a circle around the pole. You don't have to do so exactly, but if you focus on rotating around this circle more and less off to the side, with your weight between your feet (or at most over the front foot), you'll be ready for the next shot. Even with a complete weight transfer from the back leg to the front leg you don't need your weight to go outside the feet, which puts you off balance. Note that a wider stance makes it easer to generate power without going off balance.Here's a test on whether you go off balance in your follow through. Shadow practice doing your most powerful forehand shot, whether it's a loop or a smash. Freeze at the end of your follow through. Is your weight over your left foot (for a righty), or has it gone even slightly beyond that, leaving you off balance, requiring precious time to recover? Have someone give you a light shove and see if you are truly balanced. You should finish the shot balanced and instantly ready to return to ready position to follow with another shot. The best way to practice this is with multiball, where a coach feeds you shots in rapid succession, and you are forced to recover quickly for the next shot over and over.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1282title: December 17, 2012 - Distance from Tabledate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:How close should you stand to the table? Much of this depends on your playing style. Most new players tend to stand too close to the table. This leads to all sorts of problems if not fixed early on. A player who develops his game while standing too close is often jammed, which leads to short, jerky strokes that are rushed. Players like this may learn to block well, but the shorter, rushed strokes lead to a loss of both power and (when trying to hit harder) control. They also tend to stand in a backhand position, leading to a weak forehand. They also have trouble covering the wide forehand as they are unable to use the full forehand "pocket" since they are jammed at the table - instead, they can only hit the ball in the front of the hitting zone, rather than turn sideways and hit the ball at the top of the bounce with a more comfortable shot that uses the full forehand hitting zone.As players become more advanced, the opposite tendency comes up - players who back off the table if the opponent so much as looks at them funny. There are times when you should back up, primarily when the opponent is attacking strongly or if you have a defensive style (backspin or topspin), but the backing up should be in reaction to this attack, not as a habitual way to keep the ball in play in moderately fast rallies. With good technique and practice, you should be able to rally pretty fast without backing off too much. If you back off too easily, you give your opponent more time to react to your shot and get his best shot into play; you have no angles to play against your opponent; and you have far more ground to cover, both side to side and in and out.There is also the phenomenon I call "The Zigzag," of which I'm often guilty. This is where a player takes a step back to cover the forehand, then another step back to cover the backhand, then another step back to cover the forehand, and next thing you know they are lobbing from the vender booths. Instead, learn to play these shots relatively close to the table, but not so close that you are jammed.So just how far should you stand? A good guideline is to start the rally about arm's length from the table. From that distance you can handle most shots - stepping in for short ones, holding your ground in most rallies, and stepping back when forced to by the opponent's attack.  If you are a fast reaction player with good blocking and other close-to-table shots, then try to stay within that arm's length of the table until absolutely forced back. If you are a looper, you'll want to start at arm's length, but as soon as you get into a rally you can take a step back to give yourself more time to loop. (If the rally really gets fast, you'll back up even more, as top players often do when they counterloop.) Some players like to play a consistent off-table topspin game, in which case you'll back more quickly than most players - but try to back up only as far as you really have to as you happily topspin away, and fish and lob only when the opponent forces you to. (In other words, make them go for risky attack shots, where you'll get some free points, before you fish and lob.)Of course, if you are a chopper, then you'll be backing up as soon as the opponent attacks - though even there, you don't want to back up more than necessary or you'll give the opponent extra time and extreme angles to go for.Lastly, let me urge all players to at least experiment outside their comfort zone. If you are a blocker, try backing off sometimes - either on defense or looping. If you are an off-table player, try playing at the table as a variation, blocking or even looping quick off the bounce. You may find a new dimension for your game, and at the very least, you'll better understand how other players play, making it that much easier tactically when you play that type of style.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1270title: December 10, 2012: Body Movement During the Forehand Loopdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Daniel from West Virginia emailed me the following question:One of the things that I am struggling to understand is the relationship between rotation versus right-to-left leg weight transfer when looping.  I saw in one of your earlier blog entries that you compare forehand looping with "rotating around a pole" that runs from the ceiling down to the floor.  I've watchedthis video of Wang Liqinover and over and he seems to be generating most of his power with rotation rather than right-to-left leg weight transfer.  Both of his feet stay pretty much rooted in the ground at all times during the stroke:But whenever I watch counterlooping rallies between pros in an actual match, they do seem to be transferring their weight forward towards their opponent quite a bit, no?In this video of Zhang Jikelooping against underspin, I can see a large weight transfer onto the right foot, as evidenced by the fact that his left heel is off the ground when he initiates the stroke. This stroke seems to be slightly less about rotation and more about leg drive:Does this mean there is a bigger transfer of weight onto the right leg when looping underspin than when looping topspin?I'm not sure if any of this makes any sense, but if you could ever do a blog entry on the relationship of using rotation versus using forward momentum in generating power on the FH side, it would be really great.  My stroke is really suffering as I'm just not confident in how to generate the racket speed right now.This is an excellent question. The question basically is how much power should a player generate from these three aspects: rotational energy, driving forward with the back leg, and driving upward with the back leg.When looping against topspin or a block (i.e. any ball without backspin), you'll mostly use rotational energy and pushing forward with the back leg; there's little upward motion. From theWang Liqin videoDaniel links to above, you can see that Wang (3-time World Men's Singles Champion) uses a lot of rotational energy, but his head doesn't move a whole lot - he tends to keep the right-to-left body movement to a relative minimum as his body mostly rotates in a circle. The advantage of this is that it means his head and body ends only a short distance from where it started before the stroke, meaning he is almost immediately ready for the next shot. If your head and body move more from right to left (for a righty), you may gain some power, but you'll be slower recovering for the next shot. You need to find the right balance. If you have as much natural power as a Wang Liqin, then you don't need much right-to-left movement. But if you have more time, then the extra body movement will add to your power.Here's a video of Ma Long vs. Wang Liqin. Watch Ma Long (far side, currently #2 in the world, former #1) in the first point as he loops five in a row. (It's replayed in slow motion.) Like Wang Liqin, he mostly uses rotational energy, but he also moves right-to-left for extra power, especially in the very first of his loops. Now jump to the point starting 50 seconds in, and watch Wang Liqin's first two loops. (It's also replayed in slow motion.) He gets great power, yet it's almost all rotational energy - watch how little his head moves during the stroke. Now jump back to the point starting 23 seconds in (also replayed in slow motion), and you'll see a series of Wang Liqin loops where he has far more right-to-left movement - now his head does move during the stroke. Why is this? It's more a matter of not being in perfect position against these angled shots into his backhand, forcing him to go way around to loop the forehand.So while you do want that right-to-left movement (for a righty) when looping for extra power, you want to focus on rotational energy, with the center of gravity kept well between the legs, and the head moving only a little bit. The main exception is when looping from way around the backhand side, where you often aren't as far around as you might want, in which case you compensate with more right-to-left movement. (Which means a slower recovery, so you have to have fast footwork if you do this, or simply end the point with the first shot.) The other exception is when going for extra power, but as shown by Wang Liqin and Ma Long, that's not always necessary.Now look at the video Daniel linked to ofMa Long vs. the chopper(Joo Se Hyuk). Here Ma has to overcome the heavy backspin, and so much of his power is upward as he pushes up with his back leg. He's not going for a lot of speed in most of these loops, and so there's only minimal forward motion as he topspins away, mostly stroking upward and rotating in a circle, with his head starting and ending in almost the same place. (In some of the early loops, he is almost falling backward as he focuses almost totally on upward motion.) In the first point, he loops ten balls before missing the eleventh. The first eight are all basically steady loops (by world-class standards), where most of his power is going upward. Now look at the ninth loop, where he loops with much greater power into Joo's backhand. Now there's a sudden increase in right-to-left motion, with his head ending more to the left. This gives extra power. (And since he's playing a chopper, there's plenty of time to recover for the next shot.)What does this mean for you? The most important thing is to stay balanced, especially when looping against a fast incoming ball. Focus on rotational energy, and add as much right-to-left movement (for righties) as needed. Many players find it a lot easier to end the point this way, and if the ball rarely comes back, then there's no problem. At the higher levels, even these powerful loops often come back, and so recovery becomes an important issue - but at that level, players are so fast they can often get away with more sideways movement, relying on their footwork to recover for the next shot. But as shown by Wang Liqin and Ma Long, it is the rotational energy that is most important, and the rest is the extra spice often used for a little extra power or to compensate when forehand looping from way around on the backhand side.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1259title: December 3, 2012 - The Backhand Loop and Hit One-Two Punchdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:In a game dominated by forehand looping, many players forget there's another side and other point-winning shots. One of the best is the backhand loop followed by a backhand hit - a devastatingly effective one-two punch. It doesn't even have to be a backhand smash - quick, well-placed aggressive drive will usually win the point or set up an easy follow.On the forehand side, many players loop over and over. It's usually easier on that side than on the backhand because you have a bigger hitting zone. On the backhand side, the body is somewhat in the way when backhand looping, and so you have a smaller hitting zone - mostly in front of the body. While many top players learn to backhand loop over and over, many players - including many top players - instead open against backspin on the backhand side with a backhand loop, and (if it's blocked back to the backhand, as most often happens) follow it with a backhand hit against the normal blocked return.There are several advantages to this. First, as noted, it takes out the problem of the body being in the way, which is primarily a problem against a fast incoming ball (i.e. a block or topspin). Second, a hit takes less time than a loop, so even if your opening loop is quick-blocked back at you, you aren't rushed. Third, it means the opponent has to adjust to both your spinny topspin backhand loop and your not-so-spinny backhand hit. And fourth, it's easier to make last-second changes in your placement with a backhand hit, allowing you to move the ball around the table more easily (to wide angles or to opponent's elbow, the midpoint between forehand and backhand).You should vary the placement of your opening backhand loop. (And loops to an opponent's forehand are often more effective, since most players block better on the backhand.)  However, most players tend to block crosscourt against an incoming crosscourt loop. So if you have a good backhand follow-up, it's often an advantage to open crosscourt, where you both have more table (across the diagonal, corner to corner), and can expect a return to the backhand. This allows you to dominate with that backhand loop & hit one-two. Or open to the middle, which most players will cover with their backhand (when blocking), and usually also block back where the ball came from.The key to developing a good backhand loop and hit - besides getting some coaching - is to really commit to the two shots. Decide you will backhand loop any deep ball with backspin, and that you will backhand hit any blocked or topspinned return. This tends to simplify things for you while complicating it for the opponent, who has to adjust to both. (You can actually backhand loop against a short ball with backspin with a wristy shot, but that's another topic.) When going for the backhand hit, some players think of it more as a punch-block, where they essentially hit a hard block, right off the bounce.So take down your opponents with your new dynamic duo, or force them to feed you easy forehand balls to avoid it.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1248title: November 27, 2012 - Serving Short to Forehand and Long to Backhanddate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Want to twist your opponent into a pretzel? You can do so with one of the most common serving combos in table tennis: short serves to the forehand and long, breaking serves to the backhand.Short serves to the forehand are usually more awkward to handle than short ones to the backhand. This is because the wrist is freer on the backhand side to adjust the racket angle, and also because contact is made in front of you, right in front of your eyes, instead of to the side with a forehand receive. Long serves to the backhand are usually trickier to handle than long ones to the forehand. This is because most players loop better on the forehand side, and because you have a bigger hitting zone on that side than on the backhand side, where a breaking serve can be awkward to handle.Serving short to the forehand or long to the backhand also maximizes the amount of table the receiver has to cover. Suppose you serve very short and wide to the forehand, so the receiver has to contact the ball one foot from the net near the sideline. Suppose you serve long to the backhand, so the receiver contacts the ball about a foot past the end-line behind the backhand corner. Then the distance between these two contact points is about 6.7 feet. (The same is true, of course, if you serve short to the backhand or long to the forehand.) If you instead serve short and long to the forehand (or to the backhand), then the distance is about five feet. That's over 20 inches of extra movement for the receiver. It's even more if you serve wide to the backhand, and perhaps break it even wider with sidespin, so the receiver has to take the ball from outside the backhand corner. The contact points between a short serve to the forehand and a deep breaking serve to the wide backhand can be seven feet apart.So why not combine these two into a deadly duo?You can do this with forehand or backhand serves. (It's usually a bit more effective with a forehand pendulum serve, which allows you to break the deep serve to the backhand away from the receiver. However, a backhand serve type sidespin allows you to actually break the short serve a bit away from the receiver, though not as much since has less travel time.) Make sure to start out the same, with the same motion until just before contact. Then either serve very low and short to the forehand, or a long, breaking serve into the backhand.Short serves are often best where the second bounce on the far side of the table, if allowed, would be near the end-line. However, in this case, it's better to serve very short to maximize how much distance the receiver has to reach to get to the serve. Make him cover the full seven feet.The receiver also has to prepare for the deep serve into the backhand. By making it break, it makes the receiver reach even more. (This is especially true if you can break it away from the receiver, such as a forehand pendulum serve if both players are righties.) It's often effective to focus on deep spin serves, but not too fast. A fast serve to the backhand can often be more easily backhand countered, using your own speed against you.So the receiver has to be ready both for the quick step in to reach the short serve to the forehand, while also covering that deep, breaking serve into the backhand. This is not an easy task, and leads to many mistakes. On top of that, it also makes it almost impossible for a receiver to forehand loop the serve from the backhand side.So twist your opponent into a pretzel as he tries to cover these two diagonally opposed serves that the human body was never designed for. Make him cover the full seven feet as you turn him into a cooked pretzel . . . and break him.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1233title: November 19, 2012 - Backhand and Forehand Playing Distancedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:At the intermediate and advanced levels (below world-class level), the most common rallying style combines forehand looping and backhand hitting. These players often attack backspin by looping from both sides, but once in a fast topspin rally mostly hit on the backhand side. It's simply easier for most to loop in a rally on the forehand side because the body isn't in the way, so you have a huge hitting zone. On the backhand side, players are often cramped as they try to backhand loop a fast incoming ball, so hitting is easier and more effective. This often means trying to hit the backhand close to the table while looping the forehand from farther back. How can a player handle this?The problem is that hitters usually play closer to the table than loopers. If they stay at the table to hit their backhands, they are jammed and rushed on the forehand side if they try to loop. If they take a step back to loop their forehands (usually after the top of bounce), their backhand hits become late and less effective. This is further aggravated because most players hit their backhands on the rise, before the top of the bounce, meaning they want to play the backhand even closer to the table. Many players face this type of problem, even at the world-class level. Players such as Gue Yuehua and Jan-Ove Waldner favored hitting or blocking their backhand close to the table, combined with a looping forehand, and they are considered two of the greatest players of all time. So how do you solve this problem? There are several options.First, let's look at what a hitter does. Often he hits the backhand on the rise, and the forehand at the top of the bounce. This isn't a problem because when you turn sideways to hit the forehand, the hitting zone opens up and hitting at the top of the bounce is easy. So there's no problem in hitting backhands on the rise and forehands at the top of the bounce. The problem is when the backhand is hit on the rise and the forehand loop on the drop. Here are six ways to handle this problem in a fast rally.Develop diagonal footwork. Playing a quick backhand but a forehand loop farther back means moving diagonally back and forth rather than side to side. So practice this footwork in drills. Start with a practice partner alternately hitting balls side to side as you develop the footwork and strokes together. Then have your partner hit the ball randomly side to side as you learn to react to these shots as if it were a game. (It might be easier to do these drills with a coach or player feeding multiball rather than doing it "live.")Learn to both hit and loop the backhand. If the ball is coming at you very fast, or if you are close to the table, favor the backhand hit. If you have more time, or are off the table, you favor the backhand loop.Hit the backhand at the top of the bounce. Just as there's no real difficulty in playing the backhand on the rise and the forehand on the drop, there is no real difficulty in playing the backhand at the top of the bounce and the forehand on the drop. You can still start the rally by hitting backhands closer to the table, but once into the rally the natural distance would be half a step back. (And alternate version of this is to simply learn to backhand loop in the rally - but of course that defeats the whole purpose of this article, which is how to combine a hitting backhand with a looping forehand.)Loop the forehand at the top of the bounce. This takes some athleticism, and isn't for everybody. But if you are fast over the table and can smoothly and rapidly loop the forehand, you can hit the backhand on the rise and loop the forehand at the top of the bounce. Sometimes you will be forced back on the forehand, and in those cases you'll have to play your backhand late (playing backhand at the top of the bounce, backhand looping, or fishing), but when you do play the forehand at the top of the bounce, the extra effectiveness of the shot (opponents have little time to react) offset that. If you go this route, you'll want to play with a somewhat shortened forehand loop stroke.Play the backhand with your feet in a slight forehand stance. For most backhands you don't really need your feet in a backhand stance. And so many players play their backhands with their right foot slightly back (for righties). This gives them a slight head start in playing their forehands, allowing them to play the backhand closer to the table while still reacting to a quick shot to the forehand. Make sure when hitting backhands that the upper body is rotated to face the direction of your shot; it is only the back foot that should be in a slight forehand position.Learn to loop the ball late in the forehand zone. This means taking the ball near the back of the big forehand hitting zone that is created when you turn sideways. Some players learn to loop the forehand so late in the zone that they almost take it behind their body. This means learning to loop with the contact point almost directly to the side of the body, by the right shoulder (for righties). Players who do this tend to lose power (less time to accelerate), can be rushed (since they only have a small part near the back of the forehand zone to contact the ball), and have trouble going crosscourt. I don't particularly like this option, but some players do this effectively.I've put these six very roughly in order of preference, but everyone's different. Experiment, take your pick or picks (you can use more than one method), and go through your opponents like a buzzsaw with your two-winged hitting/looping attack.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1222title: November 13, 2012 - Complex or Simple Tactics?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Far too often players don't think tactically, believing the game is too complex for them to play and think at the same time. And it's true that you shouldn't be doing any conscious thinking during a point. But between points a smart player does think tactically. The key is to keep it simple."Tactics isn't about finding complex strategies to defeat an opponent. Tactics is about sifting through all the zillions of possible tactics and finding a few simple ones that work, and developing reflexive tactics to cover other situations." (That's the opening of my upcoming book, "Table Tennis Tactics for Thinkers.") What does this mean?The first part means you don't need to fry your brain working out complex patterns or finding ten ways to beat someone. Find two or three simple ones, and that'll usually suffice. Be flexible in adjusting these tactics if they stop working or trying out new ones, but keep it simple.The second part means you should develop the habit of thinking tactically, and your subconscious will get the idea. It'll soon become automatic - you'll develop reflexive tactics to cover most situations. If you tactically tell yourself to play certain shots in a certain way to a certain spot against a certain player, it soon becomes automatic both against him and against similar players, and you can focus on just two or three other tactics instead. To any experienced observer, you'll be playing a very smart tactical game, but in reality you're only aware of two or three aspects of it. You should be no more consciously aware of most of your tactical play than you would the angle of your racket when blocking a loop - not aware at all. You just do it.Most tactics should become second nature, allowing you to focus on just two or three things in any given match. And yet you'll be playing many more tactics without even thinking about it, because they will have become ingrained on your subconscious. You'll be tactically placing your shots side to side and in and out, varying the speed and spin, and doing all the tactics necessary to win - and you'll barely even notice you are doing it. What a smart player you are!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1207title: November 5, 2012 - Developing Your Forehand Smashdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:So many players have this strange idea that the best way to develop a smash is to, well, smash a lot. It seems to make sense, but isn't always the best way. I've seen this in student after student - they work on smashing by smashing a lot, and the balls spray all over the place as they ingrain the habit of spraying the ball all over the place. Smashing is, first and foremost, a precision shot, and if you practice smashing by spraying the ball all over the place, you are being counterproductive.Instead, focus on driving the ball only at the pace that you can control, and develop the precision at that speed. As you get better, increase the speed. If you find yourself spraying the ball all over the place, take it down a notch. Precision comes from good technique and timing, and these are things you should work on at a pace you can control. Spraying the all over the place is a great way to develop bad technique and poor timing.How do you develop the precision needed to have a consistent smash? It starts with the fundamentals. A coach can help you with this, but here are five techniques that lead to precision on the forehand smash. (Most apply to the backhand smash as well.)First, balance and positioning are key. If you aren't in position, or if you are off balance or not set for the shot, everything will be thrown off. When you turn sideways to hit a forehand, you have a big hitting zone to hit through, so positioning isn't so hard as long as you have active feet to move into position. You don't have to be fast, you just have to develop thehabitof getting into position for each shot. If the ball is smashable, even a slow person should almost always have time to get into position. And balance is part of this, since if you step to the ball instead of reaching, you'll usually stay balanced.Second, always use the same backswing. I believe this is the single biggest problem with players who can't smash well - they vary their backswing, and so never develop precision. It's like trying to hammer a nail where you bring the hammer up differently every time. Find that perfect spot to backswing to, and do it every time. Even if the ball is high, backswing to the same spot, and then raise the racket as needed in a continuous motion. It should become so natural and automatic that any variation to the backswing should feel unnatural and strange.Third, use the whole body in a smooth progression from bottom to top - legs, hips, waist, shoulders, and forearm. (No wrist needed for this shot - it takes away some of the precision, though some do use it for extra power, especially against shorter balls. More often a wristy smash will just cost a player precision.) Many players tend to overuse their arm, resulting in a strained and awkward smash. The arm (specifically, the forearm) breaks into the shot only near the end, as part of the natural progression, after the shoulder rotation.Fourth, and closely related to the third item above, is that you shouldn't have to strain to smash. A good smash is the result of good technique as power is created from that progression from legs to forearm. If you have to strain for a shot, it means you are overusing one muscle group at the expense of others. Here's a simple test - you should be able to smash at full power while carrying on a conversation. "Full power" may be misleading since you shouldn't actually try to smash using every muscle at full power. If you try to do so, you'll just get jerky muscles that don't work together instead of the smooth progression needed, and you'll lose both precision and power. Think of using each muscle at perhaps 80% power, which allows you to use all the muscles in conjunction, which actually leads to "full power."Fifth, there should be a slight upswing with most smashes (unless the ball is somewhat high), which results in topspin to control the shot. Even a little topspin greatly increases your target area by making the ball drop. With a fast and grippy inverted surface, the upward part of the strokes is small; with a slower, less grippy surface (including all non-inverted surfaces), there should be a little more upward motion. Careful, however, not to stroke too much up, leading to a "rolling" forehand, where a player starts with the racket too low and strokes with too much topspin for a smash. This might be the beginning of a good loop (and some players use a loop kill instead of smashing whenever possible), but not very good for a smash. Instead, focus on meeting the ball more straight on, with only a slight upward motion, and sink the ball into the wood. There should be a satisfyingsmackwhen you make a good smash.With these five tips, and with overall good technique, you can turn your forehand smash into a weapon that'll terrify opponents as they struggle to find ways to avoid it - which is a double-whammy, since you can dominate with both the smash itself or with the other strengths of your game that your opponent is no longer focused on avoiding.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1183title: October 29, 2012 - The Falkenberg Drilldate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The Falkenberg Drill (also called the Two-One Drill and the Backhand-Forehand-Forehand Drill) is probably the most popular drill for players at the intermediate and advanced levels. It combines three of the most common moves in table tennis: covering the wide forehand, covering the wide backhand, and the step-around forehand from the backhand side (since you often want to end the point with your forehand against a weak ball to the backhand). Go to any major tournament and you'll often see the top players warming up with this drill.The drill was popularized by 1971 World Champion Stellan Bengsston. While he was developing as a player at the Falkenberg Club in Sweden in the 1960s, one of the most common drills was forehand-backhand footwork, where a player alternated hitting a backhand and then a forehand from the backhand corner. The problem was this only practiced one of those three common moves - the step-around forehand - and half the drill was following a forehand from the backhand side with a backhand, which isn't as commonly done. Stellan made the Falkenberg Drill central to his training, and soon players around the world took notice.In the most common way of doing the drill, you keep returning the ball to your partner's backhand. Your partner hits two balls to your backhand, one ball to your forehand, and then repeats the sequence. You return the first ball with your backhand, step around your backhand corner and return the second ball with your forehand, then move to your wide forehand and return the third ball with your forehand. You should use the same strokes in the drill as you want to do in a match - hitters should hit, loopers should loop. Many loop the forehand and hit the backhand.There are many variations. You can start the drill off backspin with a loop, and then continue. You can either hit or loop the forehands or backhands. You can do the drill to your partner's backhand or forehand. You can have free play after a certain number of repetitions, such as after three (nine shots). Or use your own imagination and make something up. Or just use the basic standby, as described above, as many do.The drill can also be done with multiball. This allows a player to maximize how fast he can do the drill, since miss-hits by either player no longer affect the drill.A key factor in the drill is balance. If you are even slightly off-balance at any time, you'll have trouble recovering for the next shot. When I say "off-balance," I don't mean actually stumbling-around off balance; if your center of gravity goes outside the area between your feet, or even goes too much on one foot, it'll slow down your recovery for the next shot. The most common problem here is letting the weight go too much to your left (for a righty) when playing the forehand from the backhand side. It is this constant state of balance that allows top players to seemingly get to every ball since balance is the key to getting a quick start. So keep your weight between your feet.Here are some examples of the Falkenberg Drill. Watch, learn, and become a Friend of the Falkenberg!Here's a 31-second videoof Denmark star Mie Skov-Pedersen (world #79) doing the drill.Here's another video of the Falkenberg Drill(3:10), explained demonstrated by Tom Nguyen and Richard Lee.Here's former Chinese superstars Kong Linghui and Ma Wengedemonstrating the drill (9:51), with a Chinese narrator.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1125title: October 22, 2012 - Turn Opponents into Puppets with Long Servesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the big mistakes players at the intermediate/advanced levels make is to serve short over and over against an opponent who doesn't attack long serves. I've watched national championships lost because a server insisted on serving short against a receiver who was very comfortable returning short serves but had great difficulty against deep serves. At the lower levels, and often well into the advanced levels, players often serve long because, even though serves are generally easier to attack (usually with a loop), they have major advantages as well. Done well, a deep serve turns the receiver into a puppet, with the server holding the strings.The main advantage of a short, low serve is that it is difficult to attack, since the table is in the way, making it difficult or impossible to loop. It also brings the opponent in over the table, leaving him vulnerable to a deep attack.However, a short serve also allows the opponent to rush you with a quick, angled flip or push, or to drop the ball short. The shortness of your serve means the opponent can contact the ball much closer to you than off a long serve (so you have less time to react), as well as giving him a wider angle. A receiver can also drop a short serve short (so that, given the chance, it would bounce twice on your side of the table), stopping the server from looping as well as catching him off guard if he was looking to attack a deep return.Serving long takes away these advantages for the receiver, and if he can't attack the deep serve effectively, then there's little reason to serve short too often. Instead, serve as deep as possible, knowing you'll have more time to react to his shot and that his returns will have less angle available. Deep serves should go very deep, with the bounce somewhere near the receiver's end-line. Serves where the ball bounces more toward the middle of the table (depth-wise) are not nearly as effective - they are more easily attacked, they don't jam or force the opponent off the table, and they allow the receiver to hit the ball quicker and with better angles than off a truly long serve.This doesn't mean you serve long every time, allowing the receiver to hang back, waiting for the deep serve. Mix in short serves so he has to watch for those as well, making the deep serve even more effective. A mixture of long serves to the backhand and short to the forehand are especially effective.If you like to serve backspin and loop against pushed returns, and your opponent doesn't loop against deep backspin serves, why serve short? Serve long, giving yourself more time to react to the receiver's push, while also cutting down on his possible angled returns.There is one variation of long serve that doesn't go very long - the half-long serve (sometimes called a tweeny serve). With these serves the second bounce on the receiver's side, if given the chance, would go just barely off the end (or, as a confusing variation, the second bounce would just barely hit the table near the edge). These are difficult to attack effectively, they don't allow the receiver the quick, angled returns they could off a shorter serve, and they are almost impossible to drop short.Placement is also important. Often players serve right into an opponent's waiting forehand or backhand. Instead, serve at either extreme angles or to the middle. If you serve at extreme angles and very deep, the receiver will have to move to the ball, and it's not easy for him to make a strong return off a deep ball when he has to run it down. When you serve to the middle, it should be right at the receiver's playing elbow, the mid-point between forehand and backhand, and very fast, forcing the receiver to make a quick judgment on whether to use forehand or backhand, and then moving to cover it - not an easy return.Deep serves should focus on either speed or spin. Speed serves rush the opponent, forcing weak returns. They are often most effective if served dead, i.e. spinless or even with a very light backspin, forcing many receivers to put the ball in the net (especially when served to the middle), or to over-compensate and go off the end. Spin serves can be served either fast (so they rush the opponent, but allow him to use your own speed against you with a counter-hit) or slow (so they break more dramatically but give the receiver more time to react), and should break as they approach the receiver, so the receiver has to both move to reach the ball and have to compensate for the spin. Most often you want the breaking serves to break away from the receiver, especially if you can serve deep into a receiver's backhand so it breaks away from him, making him reach for it. (Most players have less range on the backhand, so forcing them to chase after a breaking serve here is especially effective.) When reaching for a ball, receivers often lower the racket, and so they lift the ball high (giving you an easy smash) or off the end.So develop those deep serves as a powerful weapon, along with short serves. The only thing more fun than turning a receiver into a puppet as you pull the strings, moving him around at will with your varied serves, is to win national championships with them. You might not do the latter, but you can be a serving puppeteer.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1111title: October 15, 2012 - How to Handle the First Loop Off Backspindate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:A loop against backspin comes at you differently than one against block or topspin. At the lower levels, the loop against backspin is often the only loop they see, but as players reach the intermediate level and beyond, more and more they face loops against just about any deep ball.And yet most players practice mostly against loops off block or (at the higher levels) counterlooping. Much of the reason for this is how easy it is to do drills where one player loops, the other blocks. You can do a continuous drill in this way, facing a loop something like every second, and rapidly become proficient at blocking (or at higher levels, counterlooping) such loops.And then someone loops against your backspin in a match (usually off a push or a long backspin serve), and you miss. Why?Three things that make a loop against backspin differentFirst, a loop against backspin usually has more topspin than other loops. This is because the looper is adding to the spin that's already there, i.e. using your backspin. The spinniest loops are those against the spinniest backspins.Second, a loop against backspin is usually (not always) done closer to the table than a loop against a block or topspin. Most blocks and topspins force the opponent off the table, both in games and in drills. So you both have less time to react, and your opponent has more angle against you.Third, since the loop against backspin is usually both spinier and done closer to the table than other loops, the trajectory of the ball is different. A slow, spinny loop against backspin often has more arc than other loops, which can throw off your timing. It also means you have to adjust your contact point. Against a more driving loop (i.e. less arc), you can just stick your racket out and let the ball come to you. Against a more arcing loop, you need to get your racket closer to where the ball hits the table or it'll bounce up, forcing you to lift your racket to react - and probably lifting the ball off the end.How do you handle such a loop differently?When blocking, take it quick off the bounce, with a slight jabbing motion at contact. You need to block somewhat aggressively or the ball's spin will jump off your racket. The harder you hit it, the less the spin will take. However, the harder you hit it, the less control you'll have, so you have to find a balance. You can also block less aggressively with a more closed racket (to compensate for how the ball will jump off your racket), relying on the softness of your shot to give the ball more time to drop as well as to throw off an opponent's timing, if he's used to more aggressive blocks, but if you do this too often opponent's will jump all over them.When smashing or counterlooping against a loop against backspin, take the ball at the top of the bounce or even on the rise. This is where many players face problems as they are better doing this when the opponent loops from farther off the table, giving them more time. With less time, they are often late smashing or counterlooping. So the key here is not to hesitate. If you hesitate even slightly when attacking a slow, spinny loop, you will probably miss.When counterlooping, make sure to loop nearly the very top of the ball. Any major lifting motion will send the ball off the end. You lift more when from off the table because the ball has more distance to travel, and so more time for the topspin and gravity to pull it down. Not so when looping against slow, spinny loop against backspin.In general, against a loop that lands short, block aggressively, or smash or counterloop. Against a loop that lands deep, still play aggressive, but focus on control.How to practice against a loop against backspinToo often players only face loops against backspin in a game, and so they might get to practice it once every few minutes. If they do drill against it, it's a drill where one player starts off the drill with a loop against backspin and then they continue the drill (or free play), and again you only limited practice against this type of loop. What would be more valuable is a systematic way of practicing against this type of loop where you could do so over and over, like a multiball drill. Except a coach can't feed the type of topspin you see in a spinny loop against backspin.Or can he? Here's an improvised multiball drill where you can face a loop against backspin over and over, and practice blocking, smashing, or counterlooping it, depending on your playing style and level.First, get a box of balls, and set them on a chair or other stand near the table. The first player grabs a ball and serves backspin. The second player pushes it back to a pre-set spot. The first players loops. While the second player practices against this loop against backspin, the first player is already reaching for another ball from the box. DO NOT PLAY THE POINT OUT. Instead, the first player only serve and loops, and then grabs a new ball to do it again. The second player alternates pushing and practicing against the loop against backspin.The result is one player gets lots of rapid-fire practice looping against backspin, while the other gets lots of rapid-fire practice against loops against backspin, with the added bonus of practicing his push. (Take that part seriously and your push will also improve.)There are four variations of this drill.Variation One: the first player always loops to the second player's forehand.Variation Two: the first player always loops to the second player's backhand.Variation Three: the first player loops randomly either to the second player's forehand or backhand.Variation Four: the first player loops randomly to all parts of the table.The first two variations allow you to focus on developing your technique against loops against backspin. The third one is your stepping stone toward doing it in a match situation, where it's simplified to just two possibilities. Ultimately, you need to get to the fourth variation, as that lets you rapid-fire practice what you'll face in a match - but if you can't do that consistently yet, then focus on the first three variations until you are ready for number four. So pick out the variation where you need the most work, and go practice!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1101title: October 9, 2012 - Training Cyclesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Training CyclesSo you have a big upcoming tournament a few months away, and want to prepare yourself to be at your best? Welcome to the world of training cycles.Some players train the same way all year, and as a result they show steady improvement. However, that improvement comes about because of the sheer amount of training. Often these players lose at big tournaments to those who don't necessarily train more, but trainsmarter.So how can you best prepare yourself for a big tournament coming a few months away? The first step is to assess where you are now, and where you want to be. Be honest with yourself: where is your game right now? Where do you want it to be for the big tournament? What parts of your game need improvement?Break your game down into five parts: physical fitness, serves, receives, strokes & footwork (these go together), and sports psychology. Divide each of these into strengths (or potential strengths) and weaknesses. If it's borderline, perhaps think of it as a potential strength. (I'm talking more about the first four items; see info below on sports psychology.)You need to put equal emphasis both on improving your weaknesses and on turning your strengths into overpowering ones. How do you turn a strength into an overpowering strength? Both by practicing the strength and by practicing the techniques that will get it into play. (Having a great loop isn't nearly as valuable if you don't have serves and receives that set it up, for example.)Decide where each of these items isnow, and where each needs to be for the big tournament. Once you've made that assessment, you are ready to begin. It's always good to know where you are going before you begin.You will now start a gradual progression where you start out by focusing on practicing the raw ingredients of your game (fitness, serve, receive, strokes & footwork), and gradually transition to match-type play. Here's a rough breakdown.Fitness: What's your current fitness level, and where does it need to be for the big tournament? Do you need to work on general conditioning, weight training, stretching? Start out by doing longer but easier workouts, and gradually transition to more intense ones. For general conditioning, you can do running, cycling, or similar exercises, or you can focus on combining it with your table tennis by doing extensive footwork drills. (This saves time.) Weight training and stretching are musts for truly serious players, and are especially important as you get older.Serves: How effective are your serves now, and where do they need to be for the big tournament? Do they consistently put pressure on your opponent while setting you up for your best shots? Start out by working on many varied serves. Get a box of balls and practice! Experiment, trying out different variations and copying others you have seen. Test them out in matches. As the big tournament approaches start to simplify by focusing on the ones you think will be most effective for you. (You might be developing other serves that won't be ready for the big tournament; put them aside, and go back to developing them afterwards.) Make sure you have lots of variations ready for different opponents with different receiving strengths and weaknesses.Receives: How effective is your return of serve now, and where does it need to be for the big tournament? Can you consistently make good receives that stop the opponent from doing what he wants to do while setting you up to do what you want to do? Just as with serves, experiment with many varied receives and test them out in matches. As the big tournament approaches start to simplify by focusing on the ones you think will be most effective for you. Use matches to get feedback on what you need to develop. Ideally practice your receives in drills with a partner with good serves, who just serves over and over so you can practice your receive. (Playing out the point or keeping score is optional.) Otherwise you'll have to develop them in actual matches.Strokes & Footwork: How strong are your strokes and footwork now, and where do they need to be for the big tournament? The two go together because you have to move to stroke; you can't have one without the other. The bulk of your practice will likely involve both. Early on focus on the basics, with lots of rote drills, i.e. drills where you know where the ball is going, such as side-to-side footwork. Make sure to use the same strokes you plan to use in the big tournament - if you are a looper, then do footwork drills where you loop; if you are a hitter, do footwork drills where you hit, etc.As the big tournament, approaches the emphasis should gradually change to more random drills and match-type drills. Random drills are ones where you don't know where the next ball is going. For example, your partner might put the ball randomly to your forehand or backhand, and you have to react. Or he might put the ball randomly all over your forehand side, and you have to react and move to loop or hit your forehand. Match-type drills mimic match conditions, and generally start out with a serve and receive. (So they combine everything you are working on.) For example you might serve short backspin, your partner pushes long to your backhand, you loop to his backhand, he blocks to your forehand, and then it's free play. There are countless variations; examine what type of patterns you use in your game, and develop drills that match. You might also consider playing in some smaller tournaments as the big tournament approaches so you can be "tournament tough" for that one.Here is an articleSix-Step Training Progressionwhich covers the transition from basic strokes and footwork drills to more advanced ones.Sports Psychology:All the training in the world won't help you if you show up too nervous to play or in some other way not ready to mentally compete at your best. Here are some resources onsports psychology.Putting It All Together: As the big tournament approaches, it's time to put it all together. Now is the time to focus on lots of matches where you use what you've been practicing. The matches not only fine-tune your game, but also provide feedback as to what needs more work and what tactics you will be using in the big tournament.The Gradual Transition:I want to emphasize that you don't only do basic rote drills at the start or only random and match-type drills at the end. You should be doing all of these drills in your training. It's a matter of degree as well as level. (Higher-level players will do more random and match-type drills early on, while beginners need more rote drills.) As the big tournament approaches, you increase the amount of random and match-type drills. You should also increase the intensity of the drills, often by doing more drills but for less time each.The Big Tournament:The day finally arrives. You've prepared for this for months. Now is where the training pays off. To maximize your success here's aTen-Point Plan to Tournament Success. Good luck!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1083title: October 1, 2012 - Short Serves to the Forehand from Backhand Sidedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the most under-utilized serves is the short serve to the forehand from the backhand side. Most players serve from the backhand side since this puts them in position to follow their serve with a forehand if there's a weak return. However, far too often players do this serve over and over crosscourt to the opponent's backhand. This makes it easier for the receiver to get into a rhythm and make effective returns. Instead, try serving short to the forehand. There are numerous advantages to this serve and only a few disadvantages.The most common serves from the backhand side that go short to the forehand are the forehand pendulum and reverse pendulum serves, the backhand serve, and the forehand tomahawk serve. Pendulum serves are forehand serves with the racket tip down. Normally the racket goes right to left for a righty (with contact on the left side of the ball), but for a reverse pendulum serve it goes left to right (contact on the right side of the ball), which is awkward for many players starting out. Forehand tomahawk serves are done with the racket tip up, with racket going from left to right (contact on the right side of the ball). Some players do reverse tomahawk serves, with the racket moving right to left (and contact on the left side of the ball), and hitting the ball with the backhand side of the racket. Backhand serves are usually done with the racket moving left to right (with contact on the right side of the ball). Backhand serves are easier to keep low and short, but often have less variety than pendulum serves, where it's easier to go either direction at contact and to do subtle changes to vary the spin. Tomahawk serves are relatively easy to keep short, but are more difficult to serve with heavy backspin, and so are often predictably sidespin and topspin variations.Left-to-right sidespins (i.e. backhand serves, tomahawk serves, and reverse pendulum serves) are often more effective since the sidespin requires the receiver to aim down the line, which is awkward to do when receiving a short ball with the forehand. When a receiver reaches in with the forehand it's easier to aim crosscourt, which is the direction you want to aim to compensate for a forehand pendulum serve.Here are the advantages and disadvantages of serving short to the forehand. (We're assuming two righties for this, but most applies to lefties as well.)AdvantagesIt's a variation that throws the receiver off from the more common serves into the backhand.Most players find receiving short balls to the forehand somewhat awkward with their forehand. In fact, many will try to receive this with their backhand. If so, then angle it even more to the forehand side (if necessary, serve more from the middle of the table, or even from the forehand side), or throw in deep serves to the backhand to keep them in position.Many receivers cannot forehand receive down the line against a ball short to their forehand, and you get a predictable return to your forehand.It draws the receiver in over the table, giving the server the opportunity to jam him on the next shot, either to the wide angles or middle.Against a player with a strong forehand but weaker backhand, a short serve to the forehand draws him in over the table, leaving him vulnerable on the backhand on the next shot.It's a shorter distance to the opponent's side than going crosscourt, and so rushes the opponent.You are closer to the net when serving down the line, and so it's easier to serve low, since your target is closer.You can throw in short serves to the middle as a variation. If the receiver has been receiving short balls with his forehand, he may find this change awkward if he's already looking to receive with the forehand.DisadvantagesIt gives the receiver an angle into the server's wide forehand. This can leave the server vulnerable into two ways, to a wide-angled return to the forehand, or if the server moves over to cover the wide forehand, he may leave himself open on the backhand. (But see #3 above.)It's tricky keeping this serve short since you have less table than if you go crosscourt, and if it goes long, it's often an easy ball for the receiver to forehand loop.Since you usually don't want to serve long to the receiver's forehand (an easy ball to loop for most players), serves to the forehand tend to be short, while you can get away with long serves to the backhand more often (since most players don't backhand loop as well). This cuts down on the variety of serves you can do to the forehand.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1068title: September 24, 2012 - Care of Equipmentdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Care of EquipmentHere are some tips of proper care of your equipment. I'm amazed at how lazy players often are on these things!Racket Covering: One of the simplest ways to keep your racket surface clean while playing is to lightly blow on it every few points and then wipe it off with a cloth. The blowing puts a very light moisture on the blade, which allows you to wipe off the surface so it's clean and dry. (Watch top players and you'll see many of them do this regularly.) When you are done playing, wipe it off with a damp towel, and after it dries (you can wipe it off lightly to hasten the process), cover it in a racket case or in plastic. This protects it from oxidizing with the air, and I can verify that sponges left out in the open deteriorate much faster than those covered. You might also cover the surface with plastic protective sheet, which will make it last even longer, especially if you only play occasionally. Occasionally use a rubber cleaner to wipe off grease. When the sponge begins to lose its bounciness, or an inverted sheet begins to lose its tackiness, or a pips-out surface has broken pips (or the surface of the pips are worn down), it's time to change. Keep the racket out of extreme heat and cold. If you are driving in the cold to play, keep the racket inside the car with you, not in the trunk where it's cold. (Otherwise the racket will be rather slow and dead until it warms up.)Racket: Consider putting edge tape on the racket, if it's not already there. This is mostly cosmetic to protect it if you accidentally hit the table with your racket, as sometimes happens during play.Shoes: Generally don't wear them except at the playing hall. They are not meant for walking, and don't give as much support as normal shoes. If you do wear them outside the playing hall, be careful not to get the soles dirty. If you do, wash them off. Otherwise, not only will you lose traction when you play, you'll track dirt into the player area. Don't. If you are playing on floors that aren't grippy, wash the soles of your shoes off to add traction. (Another good way to add traction is to step lightly on a wet towel every few points. You'll see top players do this all the time when they play on cement or wood floors; try it and you'll see.)Shirt: Other than wearing something that's both comfortable and legal (seeUSATT rules 3.22 and 3.25, but primarily neat, not the same color as the ball, and without huge advertisements), what do I have to say here? If you have a nice table tennis shirt with a nice design on it, that design will slowly wear away with washing. To slow that down, turn the shirt inside-out when you wash it. That way the water in the washing cycle will hit against the inside of the shirt rather than directly on the design, which wears it away much faster.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1051title: September 17, 2012 - Why Table Tennis Really Is Chess at Light Speeddate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:We often say table tennis is chess at light speed. It has all the tactics of chess except you don't have time to think things over - there's no time clock, just a ball coming at you, often at dizzying speeds. But table tennis is more like chess in other ways as well.Most chess openings involve pushing pawns as players maneuver to control the center of the board and attack with their stronger pieces. Most table tennis rallies start with pushing as players maneuver to control the table and attack with their stronger shots.Chess players try to control the board early on with their bishops and knights, which set up their more powerful pieces, the rooks and queen. Table tennis players try to take control of the rally early on with their opening loops and drives, which set up their more powerful shots, their smashes and loop kills.Chess players often lose when they bring out their queen too early, before their other pieces are in position to support it. Table tennis players often lose when they try to smash or loop kill too early in the rally, before they've set up the shot.In chess, if you lose your queen without taking the opponent's queen, you almost always lose. In table tennis, if you can't get your best shot into play while your opponent can, you almost always lose.In chess you can start off by pushing your pawn one or two squares. In table tennis you can start off by pushing short or long.Chess players all have a weakness - their king, which they must guard at all times. Table tennis players all have weaknesses, and they must guard those weaknesses at all times.When a chess player is losing he often tries for a stalemate in desperation. When a table tennis player is losing a point he often lobs in desperation.In chess the pawns are the weakest piece, but used properly, they can win by supporting stronger pieces, by smothering an opponent, or by getting "queened." In table tennis the push is often the weakest shot, but you can win with it by using it to set up stronger shots, by smothering an opponent with well-placed pushes, or by turning it into a powerful weapon with quickness, placement, heavy backspin, or keeping it short.When a chess player doesn't know how to react to an opponent's opening, he studies and learns the proper moves. When a table tennis player can't return an opponent's serve, he practices and learns the proper receives.In chess, you have a lot of time to think and plan before each move. In table tennis you have a lot of time to think and plan before each match.In speed chess, you have little time to think and plan before each move. In table tennis you have little time to think and plan before the next point.In chess, you run into time trouble if you can't quickly and instinctively see the right move in most circumstances. In table tennis you run into trouble if you can't quickly and instinctively see the right shot in most circumstances.So yes, table tennis is just chess at lightning speed. Which means, of course, that chess is simply table tennis at a glacial pace!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1024title: September 10, 2012 - If You Can See It, You Can Loop Itdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:This Tip is for those who wish to reach a high level of play, and who either play a looping style (like the large majority of top players) or are developing their style of play and aren't sure what direction to go. The modern game at the higher levels is an incredibly athletic, fast, and spinny sport. What were considered incredible shots in the past are now routine as the looping game has developed to the current level. Part of this comes from training, part of it comes with the realization that these shots are possible, and part of it comes from modern sponges, which are far superior for looping than the ones from the past. (If I had some of these modern inverted surfaces back in the 70s and 80s. . . oh boy!)The down side is that we've lost much of the hitter versus looper battles of yesteryear. Hitters dominated the 1960s, 70s, and much of the 80s, but by the 1990s loopers dominated, and now there are essentially zero hitters at the highest levels. What this means is that if you want to reach the highest levels, or even to reach a relatively high level, you probably should be looping as well. This doesn't mean other styles can't compete below world-class level, just that they are at a disadvantage. So unless you have a very good reason not to, you should develop your game as a looper. (There are also some world-class choppers, but they are not so much choppers as chopper/loopers, who primarily chop on the backhand, usually with long pips, and chop, loop, and counterloop on the forehand.)What exactly does this mean? At its most basic level, it means if the ball comes long and you can see it, you should train to loop it. Period. (My definition here of "seeing it" is any ball that's not coming at you so fast that you can't really do anything other than reflex block or back up well off the table so you have more time.)This doesn't mean you can't smash balls that are high, though many top players loop those as well. What it means is you don't have time to make that split-second decision on whether to loop or do something else; that wastes time. Instead, assume you are going to loop it until proven otherwise, and react by immediately setting up to loop. If the ball comes at you so fast you simply can't react in time to loop, then by all means do a reflex block or counter, or back up and fish and lob. But in general, as the ball comes out to you, you should be reflexively setting up to loop.There is one other complication - should you loop on both sides or just on the forehand? These days I'd say both sides. There are still many players who reach high levels looping their forehand but mostly hitting their backhands, but even that can be a disadvantage at the higher levels, where these backhand hitters are turned into blockers. And yet a good, hard backhand hit or strong blocking game combined with a good forehand loop can take you pretty far. But looping from both sides can take you even farther - just watch the very best players and see how nearly all of them loop nearly everything from both sides.So to expand on what all this means at its most basic level, here is some advice I tell up-and-coming juniors from the intermediate level up - and remember my definition above of "seeing it.": On the forehand, if you can see it, loop it. If you can't see it, back off and loop it. On the backhand, if you can see it, loop it. If you can't see it, either block or back off and loop or fish.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1010title: September 4, 2012 - Multiball Trainingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Multiball TrainingMost rallies at the intermediate level start out with backspin, often with the server looking to serve and loop. If he doesn't loop, then the receiver looks for a chance to loop. Whoever can open with a strong loop against backspin has a huge advantage. But many players practice looping against the block over and over, or occasionally do serve and loop drills where they get only one loop in the rally. Wouldn't it be great if there were a way to practice looping against backspin systematically, over and over? (Well, that's easy - play a chopper. But there aren't that many choppers around these days. So what can you do if you don't have a chopper handy?)And wouldn't it be great if there were a way to push yourself with stroking and footwork drills at a pace faster then you or your practice partner can rally consistently? Or to simulate game situations that you need work on?The answer is multiball training. In multiball training, a coach or practice partner stands to the side of the table with a box of balls (on the left side if he's a righty), and feeds the ball to you. He does this by tossing the ball back, usually (though not always) letting it bounce on the table, and then hitting it to you with his paddle. In this way he can feed different spins and speeds to all parts of the table, either in systematic patterns or randomly. Essentially all of the best players in the world regularly use multiball training; the top Chinese players use multiball for about one-third of their practice sessions. (To see examples of this, go to Youtube.com and search for "table tennis multiball training.")By having your partner feed you backspin over and over, you can practice looping against backspin, and get far more practice shots per minute (up to one per second or so) than if you just do serve and loop practice. Or the feeder can vary it, giving you a backspin and then a topspin, as it would be in a real rally (if opponent blocked your first loop back), and do so in rapid succession. Or he can feed topspin side to side or in other patterns so you can practice stroking and footwork. Or he can feed the ball randomly to all parts of the table (or to designated segments), simulating a real game.All multiball drills are either rote drills, where you know where the ball is going, or random drills, where you do not, or some combination of the two. An example of a combination would be one ball to the middle that you attack with your forehand, followed by a random ball to either corner that you attack with forehand or backhand.To do multiball training, you'll need a box of balls. You can do it with a few dozen balls, but most coaches start with a gross (144) or so of training balls. (Training balls are cheaper than tournament balls, i.e. 3-stars, and you can buy them a gross at a time rather inexpensively.) If you and a practice partner are doing this, start off by actually practicing your multiball. (When I first began coaching many years ago one of the first things I did was go off to a table and practice multiball feeding for about an hour.)While most multiball training is fed from the side of the table, there are variations where the feeder feeds from the far side of the table, either by the end-line or from farther back, to simulate shots from those positions. And while most coaches bounce the ball on the table before feeding it, some speed things up by hitting the balls right out of the air without bouncing them.There are an infinite number of multiball drills you can do; use your imagination. You can either isolate a specific shot that needs work (such as forehand or backhand loop or smash against backspin), the types of footwork drills you use in a match (such as side to side), or other match simulations. For example, when I played tournaments I liked to dominate the table with my forehand, so players would often serve short backspin to my forehand, then quick-push to my backhand to take my forehand out of play and force me to play my weaker backhand. So I did multiball drills where the feeder gave me a short backspin ball to my forehand, then a deep backspin to my backhand. I'd push the short ball, then step around and loop the second with my forehand. (For most players, I'd recommend looping the second ball with your backhand, unless you have very fast feet, so develop your backhand attack.)Here are a few drills you can try, including ones mentioned above (so you don't have to keep consulting the text). Use your imagination; many top players and coaches make up drills on the spot to address a particular issue.Looping against backspin from both wings from all parts of the table, either to one spot or to multiple or random spots. Examples include backspin alternating to wide forehand and middle, and you loop both with forehand; or backspin alternating from wide forehand to wide backhand, and you alternate looping forehand and backhand.Backspin/topspin combinations. For example, backspin to the middle, followed by topspin to the wide forehand; you loop both with your forehand. Or a longer pattern such as four feeds alternating between backhand and forehand, where perhaps the first is backspin, the next three are topspin, all in quick succession as in a match, and you have to attack all four shots.2-1 drill, also called the backhand-forehand-forehand or Falkenberg drill (for the Falkenberg club in Sweden, where it was popularized by 1971 World Men's Singles Champion Stellan Bengtsson), where you play three shots: a backhand from the backhand side, a forehand from the backhand side, and then a forehand from the forehand side. This is a favorite among top players since you practice the three most common moves: covering the wide forehand, covering the wide backhand, step around forehand.Random topspin, either to two spots, the wide forehand and wide backhand, or to all parts of the table. You can also combine random drills with rote drills, such as having a ball to the middle you attack with your forehand, followed by a random ball to either corner that you attack with forehand or backhand.Short ball (often with backspin) followed by a deep ball. You push or flip the short ball, and loop the deep ball.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/1001title: August 27, 2012 - Movement in Doublesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:There are two standard ways to move in doubles. At the advanced levels, if you have two righties and they train regularly for doubles, they usually learncircling footwork, where after each shot the player steps backwards and circles clockwise to the left so they can approach the table from their backhand side and go into a neutral or forehand-favoring ready position. (A righty's normal ready stance would be toward the left, with his playing elbow near the center of the table, or more to the left to favor the forehand, or more to the right to favor the backhand.) Two lefties would do the same, except they move counter-clockwise to the right. However, learning to do circling footwork takes a lot of practice, usually under the supervision of a coach. You also need two mobile players.There are four movements made with this circling footwork. Assuming two righties, they are:After making your shot, step backward.As your partner is moving to and making his shot, you move to the left.As your partner steps back (or to the right and then back if his shot was from the backhand side), you move in to the table from the left side, allowing you to start the rally off in a neutral or forehand-favoring ready stance.Move to where the ball is being hit and make your shot. Then repeat from #1 above.For most players (and for lefty-righty combos, which is an advantage in doubles), it's easier to usein-out footwork. Basically this means that after each shot, a player steps backwards to allow his partner to move in, and the two take turns, moving in and out. (You don't want to move too much to the side or 1) you'll be out of position on the next shot; 2) if the opponents hit an angled shot toward you you'll likely block your partner, and 3) if you don't block your partner against an angled shot, he'll likely block you from getting back after that shot.)The disadvantage of in-out footwork is that if there are two righties or two lefties, one of them will usually approach the table from the forehand side, and so won't be in a natural ready position.  This is fine if one of the players is stronger on the backhand than the forehand. So you should normally position the stronger forehand player on the left, the stronger backhand player on the right. (Reverse for two lefties.)  If you have a left and a righty, then in-out footwork is natural, with the lefty trying to stay on the right side, the righty on the left side.There are four movements made with this in-out footwork.After making your shot, step backward.Watch where your partner is moving to make his shot, and move to the opposite side.As your partner steps back, you step in.Move to where the ball is being hit and make your shot. Then repeat from #1 above.You can also do a hybrid of these two styles of footwork, where you generally use in-out movements, but when you see the opportunity, you circle around to the left (for two righties) behind your partner so you can approach the table from the backhand side and so get into a neutral or forehand-favoring ready stance for the next shot. With lefty-righty combos (or if you have one player much stronger on the forehand, one much stronger on the backhand), you would favor in-out footwork, but perhaps switch to circling footwork when the two players are stuck on the wrong side so they can get back to their better positioning.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/993title: August 20, 2012: Covering the Middledate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Players so often hear coaches tell them to attack the opponent's middle. (The middle is not the middle of the table; it's the midpoint between your forehand and backhand, where your playing elbow is.) But it is equally important to be able to cover the middle when the opponent goes there. How do you do that?First, remember the "Middle Rule." In general, if the ball comes to your middle and you are rushed or close to the table, favor your backhand; if you have time or are not too close to the table, favor your forehand. You can vary this rule based on your own individual skills and playing style, but in general it's a pretty good rule to go by.However, there is more you can do against those middle balls. Don't think of them as a problem; think of them as an opportunity. If you react properly and in time, you have several advantages.If you are using your backhand close to the table, you can do a quick attack to both wide angles, as well as the opponent's middle. Often it's the perfect time to go quick to the opponent's forehand, drawing them out of position. If they see that coming, they may move to cover their forehand - in which case they may be open on the wide backhand.If you are using your forehand, here's your chance to dominate the table. First, just like with the backhand, you now have an angle into both wide corners, as well as into the middle. Second, the shot will leave you in perfect forehand position for the next shot, so if you are strong on the forehand, you probably will get two forehands in a row.Whether you use your forehand or backhand, you always have the option of going right back at the opponent's middle, and if your shot there is stronger than their shot to your middle, you should have the initiative.So learn to cover your middle and turn this normal weakness into a strength. Practice this with random drills where your partner puts the ball to all parts of the table - both wide angles and your middle - and you practice making strong returns against them. Another good drill is to have your practice partner alternate hitting one randomly to one of the wide angles, then to your middle. You respond to the random wide angle shots with the appropriate shot, and then move to cover the middle shot with your forehand so that you learn how to dominate the table with the forehand from the middle. (You can also do both of these drills, and many others, multiball style.) Or make up your own drills to learn to cover the middle - there are many possibilities. Go to it.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/983title: August 13, 2012 - Racket Tip Angle on the Backhanddate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Where should the tip of your racket be when you hit a backhand drive? The answer has changed over the years. Historically, players could choose to keep the racket tip down (so that a line between the tip and the handle would parallel the ground), or with the tip pointed up to 45 degrees upward, or somewhere in between. At the higher levels, however, this has changed.When the tip is more down, you get more pure power, as well as the potential for more topspin. It's almost like having a second forehand, as demonstrated by such past stars as Jorgen Persson and Jim Butler. However, it's generally not as quick, it's generally not as consistent unless you back up more, and it's harder to cover the middle.When the tip is more up, the shot becomes quicker and flatter, generally more consistent, and you cover the middle better, but you lose the potential for extra topspin. You can still hit the ball pretty hard, but it basically becomes an aggressive blocking backhand. A good example from the past would be 1971 World Men's Singles Champion Stellan Bengtsson, who hit his backhand with the tip somewhat up.At the beginning level, it's probably easier to hit the backhand with the tip at least somewhat up. It's also easier for kids, since it's awkward hitting with the tip down until you are tall enough that your elbow hangs naturally well over the table. (Otherwise you have to lift the elbow up to do this.) At the intermediate level there's probably no major advantage to either way - both ways work, with the tip down players more powerful, the tip up players quicker.At the higher levels, however, with modern souped-up sponges, the regular backhand has been mostly replaced by either the backhand loop or a very topspinny backhand. (The definitions aren't clear on this as the distinction between the two isn't as clear as it used to be.) To create topspin, you need to drop the tip down so you can accelerate it through the ball. And so nearly all top players play with the tip more down, creating extra topspin in their shots.So which should you use? If you aspire to reach a high level, then unless you naturally play a quick-blocking style backhand, I'd recommend keeping the tip a bit more down, and develop it as a serious weapon, with both speed and topspin, perhaps as strong as your forehand. Some players attack with the tip down, but raise the tip some when blocking; experiment and see what works for you. If you do decide to develop your backhand into a topspinny shot that dominates like a forehand, look into using sponges that are designed for this. Trying to do a modern topspin shot with equipment designed for the game as it was played in the past is like racing in the Indianapolis 500 with a Model T. (For help with that, ask your dealer, or a coach or top player.)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/969title: August 6, 2012 - The Feel of Good Techniquedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Good technique should feel right. If it doesn't, there's probably something wrong with it, and you should probably have a coach take a look at it. Good technique feels right because it is, almost by definition, the simplest and most efficient way of doing that particular stroke to maximize speed, spin, and/or control.What this means is that once you have gotten the basics of a new technique, you don't have to go through a checklist to make sure you are doing it properly. (Let a coach do that.) A coach or top player can help identify when you have done a "good" stroke, the one whose feel you should remember and repeat. There might be one or two things you need to remember and focus on while developing the stroke, but mostly just remember the feel of a good stroke, and try to repeat it. Learn the specifics only so you can get the right feel back. Then just let the shot go.Besides the stroke itself, you should remember the feel of the contact. This is how you maximize control, as well as spin and speed. A consistent contact, combined with a consistent stroke, leads to great control and consistency.When something feels off, then all you have to do is remember the feel of the stroke and contact and it'll come back to you. Try to remember a particular practice session or match where the feel was just right, and regularly use that memory to get the proper feel back.While you don't need a checklist for your technique, you should have a specific memory of a time when you were doing it just right, and remember the feel of it. Then all you have to do is replicate the feel of the shot, and you should be able to do it just right again. Do this every session, and watch your level improve.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/957title: July 23, 2012 - Ready Positiondate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:What is the proper ready position? It's the position that'll allow you to react most rapidly to the opponent's next shot. It's extremely important in a sport as fast as table tennis. And yet many players have very poor ready positions. They stand up too straight, their feet are too close together, their weight isn't on the balls of their feet, and their non-playing arm hangs loosely at their side like a dead snake.You want your feet somewhat wide (at least shoulder width apart or more), at least slightly bent, and either parallel to the table or with the right foot (for right-handers) slightly back. The latter puts you in a slight forehand position, but many players actually play their backhands from that position. If you play a flatter, steadier backhand (i.e. blocking and countering), then you don't need to be in a backhand stance to play backhands. The more aggressive you play the backhand (hitting or looping) the more you'll need to be in a ready position that allows you to quickly move into a backhand stance, and so you would want the feet more parallel to the table. Experiment and find what's comfortable for you.Some players stand in a very backhand stance and greatly favor their stronger backhands. This may work for them somewhat, but it further weakens their already weak forehands. They would probably do better to adopt a more neutral stance.The racket should normally point at the opponent, or more specifically, where the opponent would hit the ball. This allows you to move to forehand or backhand equally well. Some players tend to hold their playing arm out to the side too much, and so are more ready for forehands than backhands. Try holding the racket more in front of you, even if it means bringing the playing elbow more out in front.Some players, including me, prefer to hold the racket in a slight backhand position (so the backhand side is partially pointed toward the far side). Conventionally, the backhand is hit quicker off the bounce than the forehand. This means you have less time to hit the backhand. In many cases, this doesn't matter since the stroke is shorter. I find the backhand rushed and awkward when starting from a truly neutral position, while the forehand, where you have plenty of time to get the paddle into position as you turn sideways, is much easier. So years ago I adjusted my ready position so that the racket is in that slight backhand position. This gives you a head start on backhands, while I still have plenty of time to move the racket over for the forehand. I don't normally coach this, but I have advised some players who feel rushed on the backhand to experiment with this.Weight should be equally distributed between your legs, with your weight centered and balanced, with weight toward the inside balls of your feet. The feet should point slightly outwards, allowing quick sideways movement. Lean slightly forward at the waist. The non-playing arm should be raised as a counter-balance to your playing arm, with the hand at least as high as the elbow.Want to see examples of good ready positions? Google "table tennis ready position pictures," and dozens of great examples will come up. Pick what looks right for you.You also want good playing shoes. (A good ready position with bad shoes is like running in dress shoes; not a good idea.) Ideally, get table tennis shoes, which aremadefor table tennis. They range from what are essentially socks with rubber soles (i.e. highly flexible but little support) to ones with great support. If you have foot problems, are overweight, or play mostly on cement, you probably need extra support. Don't use running shoes, which are designed for running forward, not quick side-to-side movements.Here's an easy way to find a good ready position. Imagine you are covering someone in basketball. Notice how you automatically spread your legs and bend your knees? This lowering of your center of gravity puts you in the proper ready position, allowing you to move quickly either way. (The only catch - lower your arms, since you don't have to cover someone trying to shoot a basketball over your head!) You can use similar examples for a shortstop in baseball or a goalie in soccer.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/951title: July 16, 2012 - Serving Lowdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Serving low is one of the most underestimated skills in table tennis. The problem is that while some opponents will attack slightly high serves, more often it simply gives the opponent more leeway for their returns, making both controlled and aggressive serve returns much easier. Players at the beginning and intermediate levels often get away with slightly high serves for a time, especially if they have otherwise good serves (i.e. spinny or deceptive), but inevitably, at some point, they will lose winnable games because of these serves, often without realizing the problem. A low serve forces the opponent to hit up on the ball instead of driving the ball forward, making receives more difficult.An exercise I sometimes recommend to players is to stand to the side of a match between a very strong player and a much weaker one and see the contrast. You may have to watch several match-ups as there are relatively strong players who don't serve super low just as there are weaker players whose serves almost skim the net. Watch the world-class players and see not only how low their serves cross the net, but how low the ball bounces on the far side.So how do you keep your serve super low? Here are five tips.Contact the ball low to the table, ideally at about net height. The higher the contact point the higher the ball will tend to bounce. There are top players who contact the ball seemingly high but that's because they've developed such incredible touch that they can get away with stretching this. It's a lot easier to have a low contact point than to have incredible touch.Barely graze the ball when serving, especially when serving short with spin. The more you graze the ball, the more energy goes into spin instead of speed, giving the ball a lower bounce. (You should graze the ball even on no-spin serves, since the key to a no-spin serve that looks like a spin serve is using a regular spin motion but contacting the ball near the slow-moving handle, so grazing the ball will not create much, if any, spin.)Don't think of it as serving low. Think of it as a struggle to get the ball over the net. If you contact the ball very low and barely graze the ball, there should be little energy in the motion of the ball, and it should barely even reach the net, much less go over it. So instead of trying to lower your serve, think of having to raise your serve so that it barely goes over the net.Note that the key is not just serving low to the net, but making the ball bounce low on the far side. Besides serving so the ball crosses the net low, you do this by having the ball bounce on your side as far from the net as possible. It's easier to serve short by having the first bounce on your side be relatively close to the net, and that's how it's usually taught. However, as you improve, move the first bounce farther from the net. If the ball bounces near the net, it has a higher upward angle to cross the net, and so bounces more downward on the other side, meaning much of its energy is going downward, which means it'll bounce up higher. However, if the first bounce is farther from the net, then it'll cross the net with a lower angle, and so bounces less downward on the other side, with more of its energy going forward instead of up, and so you get a lower bounce. The problem, of course, is that the farther from the net the first bounce is the harder it is to serve short (with the forward energy making it go deeper), so you have to practice and work on seeing how far away from the net you can make the first bounce and still keep it short. (Jan-Ove Waldner is often credited with being the one who discovered this connection between first bounce and the height of the bounce.)Practice!!! When you can start half the rallies with a low, spinny serve, you have a tremendous advantage. If you want to have this tremendous advantage, you know what to do. Go to it.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/945title: July 9, 2012 - Telegraphing Servesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the more subtle ways of turning an effective serve into an ineffective one is to telegraph it. Players often telegraph their serves for years and never realize it. They get away with it because most players don't pick up on it, and so don't realize the server is essentially signaling the serve in advance. However, as you reach higher levels, opponents pick up on these subtle signs more often, often subconsciously, and the server doesn't realize it - he just thinks he's playing stronger opponents who return serves better. The most common example are servers that telegraph whether they are serving long or short.As an example, I recently played a top player, rated about 2350. He would serve short most of the time, but about every fourth serve he'd switch to a deep serve to my backhand. I could see it coming every time (and would step around and loop it with my forehand), but it took two games before I figured out what was giving it away - whenever he served deep, he'd set up with his racket slightly farther back and more closed than when he was going to serve short. I beat him three straight, and then told him what had happened.There are many other examples; players tend to set up differently for different serves. They may start with their racket in one position to serve short backspin, another for sidespin and topspin serves, perhaps another for no-spin. Or it might be something more obvious. For example, many players like to high-toss serve, but can't really control them. And so the serve might always be predictably long, or the same type of spin over and over. (Many high-tossers serve only backspin serves that go long.) One player I know always sticks his tongue out at the start of his serve motion when he's serving deep! (I used this against him for years, both as a player and when coaching against him.) At the recent U.S. Open one opponent had an obvious different motion for his short and long serves, and so very early in his service motion perceptive receivers were already moving in for short serves or preparing to loop the long ones.How do you read a telegraphed serve? If you observe the server, you might not consciously see differences in his serve motion any more than you consciously see differences in, say, people's faces. But subconsciously, just as you can recognize a person's face without consciously seeing what makes it different, you can subconsciously recognize different motions that go with different serves. Once you can do that, you can try to figure out what it is that gives the serve away - but surprisingly, from a player's point of view, that's not important. All that's important is that you are able to recognize what the serve is in advance. Let your subconscious be your guide.How do you avoid telegraphing the serve? It's actually very simple. Set up each time as if you plan to serve the same serve, and only after you are set to serve do you "change" your serving plan to what you really want to serve. This doesn't mean you can't decide earlier what serve you are going to use; it means that after deciding what serve you are going to use, you still consciously set up as if you are serving your most common serve, and then make the mental switch to the serve you are really going to use.Five-time U.S. Champion Dan Seemiller once told me that he could often tell what an opponent was serving before they served. The subtle clues are often there, you just have to look for them, both consciously and subconsciously. Trust your subconscious when it picks up on something. It usually knows what it's doing.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/932title: June 25, 2012 - The Game is All Mentaldate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Okay, let's be up front about this - the game is not all mental. Or is it? At least indirectly,everything comes from the mental side. Even physical training cannot be effective unless you push yourself - and that's mental. Even more specifically, as a member of the USA Mini-Cadet Team recently reminded me, once you are out at the table playing a match, the gameisall mental.To quote Derek Nie (age 11, rated 2146), "You can't improve your skills at a tournament. So at tournaments, the game is all mental." I was his coach at the Eastern Opens a few weeks ago when he said this. He is a wise fifth grader.In the middle of a big match, you are not going to get stronger, faster, or improve your stamina. You are not going to suddenly learn how to loop if you couldn't do so before. You won't suddenly learn techniques you didn't have before. What you have is what you brought into the match, and how you use them. The former you no longer have control over; the latter you have complete control, if you know how to do so. And it's all mental.The mental game generally breaks down into two aspects: sports psychology and tactical skills. Sports psychology is your ability to play your best despite the pressure of a match. Tactical skills are your ability to figure out how best to use what weapons you have - and much of that comes from clear thinking that comes from sports psychology. Together, they should be your primary focus in a match. If you are able to play with relative calm and focus, and are able to think clearly and figure out how best to use your various techniques to win, you have a strong mental game. And that is why the game is all mental.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/923title: June 18, 2012 - Playing in Different Time Zonesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:It can be very tough playing well in tournaments after traveling, especially if you cross several time zones. For example, in the U.S., players on the east and west coast sometimes fly 3000 miles to play in the U.S. Open, USA Nationals, or North American Teams Championships. Often they play poorly, especially on the first day, and are frustrated. Sometimes they come back on day two and play well and conveniently "forget" how poorly they played the first day, and so never really figure out how to avoid it in the future.Travel messes up your sleeping habits, with jet lag leading to fatigue. (So does dry air and varying air pressure, which can also cause nausea, as well as the general hassle of travel.) West coast players playing in east coast tournaments struggle to play effectively at 9AM, which is 6AM their time - meaning they probably had to get up at 4AM. East coast players have little trouble playing at 9AM in west coast tournaments, which is noon to them - but when they start playing in 7PM matches that go on until 9 or 10 PM, well, that's past midnight for them. Junior players are especially vulnerable to this.If you travel west to east and don't have morning matches, or if you travel east to west and don't have nighttime matches, then you may consider simply sticking with your own time. If you travel west to east, you might want to get something to cover the windows so bright sunshine doesn't wake you up early and mess up your plans.Here are some ways to adjust to changing time zones. (Note - I may add more to this article later on, especially if I get good suggestions from others. One interesting thing I learned while doing some online searching is that some people use over-the-counter melatonin as a way to adjust their circadian rhythms and sleep habits - but I don't really know about this, and there are warnings to consult with a doctor first.)1) One or two weeks before the tournament start adjusting to the local time of the tournament. Perhaps adjust your schedule by an hour two weeks in advance, another hour a week in advance, and a few days before the tournament you are on tournament local time.2) Arrive at least two days before your main events begins. In some major tournaments you can get away with arriving the day before if your main event doesn't start on the first day. In this case the first day is more or less your "warm-up" day - but beware, you might not play well at the start if you only got there the day before, and it's sometimes difficult to come back from a bad start. If you go to a really major tournament only once or twice a year, perhaps come out two nights in advance, relax and have a little practice the day before (think of it as a vacation day), and by tournament time you are on top of the world, rested and ready to go.3) Get extra practice at the tournament site the day before. There's nothing like a good workout to energize the body. Both drills and practice matches are effective. (Don't do this too late the night before or it might affect your sleep.)4) If you really feel tired, go to the restroom and splash cold water on your face. It's a surprisingly simple yet effective tool. I've both done it and had students do it for years with surprising success.For players traveling from East to West:5) When you first arrive, you may feel like going to bed early local time, since what's "early" locally is late in your own time zone. Resist the urge. If you go to bed too early, you'll stay in your own time zone sleeping habits, wake up too early, and if you have matches the following night you may pay the price. Related to this is that many players sleep while traveling to the tournament, making it that much harder to go to sleep at the right time. Unless you are the type who can sleep at any time, avoid too much sleeping while traveling, since it'll make it harder to sleep later on. (This might be difficult for some, since many do sleep while flying to tournaments.)6) If you have to play nighttime matches, consider taking an afternoon nap during the tournament. Just a 20-30 minute nap will get you rejuvenated. But make sure to arrange a good practice session afterwards to get the body warmed up again.7) One surprising solution: bright light a couple hours before the time you would normally go to bed will often change your circadian rhythms, delaying the time you'll go to sleep and get up, and more quickly get you into local time.For players traveling from West to East:8) The big problem here are the morning matches. Hopefully you've been going by local time before the tournament, at least to an extent. It's probably more important doing this for west-to-east players, who otherwise will face very difficult early morning matches when their bodies are still half asleep. To help wake up, get some morning exercise. Go out for a jog before breakfast. After breakfast, get to the playing hall early for an exhilarating work-out, with the focus on drills that are physical to get the body thoroughly awake and ready to play. A huge advantage here is multi-ball training, where you can drill very fast without losing control, as often happens when two players try to rally faster than usual. Or play practice matches, which often get a player going more effectively than just drills.9) When you first get up, expose yourself to bright light. This wakes up the body quickly. To a lesser degree, so does splashing cold water on your face.10) The temptation will be to stay up late the night before, since the local "late" isn't so late in your time zone. (This is even more tempting if you sleep while traveling to the tournament.) But if you do that, you'll pay the price when you have to get up. On the other hand, many people can't go to bed early; if they try, they'll just lie awake. But try to find a way. Perhaps go to bed early, but read until you are sleepy, and then go to sleep. Avoid things that will keep you awake in the hours before the time you should go to bed - excessive exercise (try to get this done before dinner time), eating too much too late, alcohol, and caffeine.Just remember what your goal is when you travel to tournaments: to play well. If you prepare yourself so that you are alert and energetic at the start and finish each day, you'll probably play well.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/913title: June 11, 2012 - Dealing with Cheaters and Poor Sportsmanshipdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:How should one deal with people who cheat or have bad sportsmanship? There is a simple answer which would make this article very short: call for an umpire. However, umpires are not always available (and most of your matches will likely be practice matches anyway, where there are normally no umpires), so sometimes you'll have to deal with this on your own, especially if it's only poor sportsmanship, not outright cheating. Besides, you don't want to call for an umpire every time you think an opponent looks at you funny, so when possible, deal with the problem on your own.Cheaters cheat because they want to win. There are limits to how you can deal with this short of calling for an umpire. If the opponent simply calls the score wrong, the remedy might be to simply call the score out loud every point, so the score is absolutely clear to you, your opponent, and anyone watching. Cheaters don't like this because it's hard to argue about the score when it's been called out loudly and clearly every point.But there are other types of cheaters. They may serve illegally; use illegal surfaces; call lets on points that are not lets; claim their shot hit the edge or that your edge ball missed; and many other ways. You might be able to deal with some of these on your own. For example, if an opponent serves illegally (probably the most common form of "cheating"), politely explain why the serve wasn't legal. Ideally, catch the illegal serve and explain why the serve was illegal. If you attempt to return it, then the point counts. But you can still ask the opponent to serve legal between points.If an opponent refuses to serve legally, and you can't get an umpire, then you are basically stuck, so deal with it. In tournaments you usually can get an umpire for this, but rarely in practice. And surprisingly, many umpires are reluctant to call many illegal serves. So you may have to learn to deal with some illegal serves. (Some illegal serves don't really give much of an advantage to the server, other than the fact that if they have to serve legally, they wouldn't be able to use their normal serves and they'd have difficulty serving effectively. Other illegal serves give a direct advantage to the serve, such as hiding contact, throwing the ball backwards into the racket, or excessively short tosses.)Illegal surfaces are usually easier to deal with. You are allowed to examine an opponent's racket at the start of the match. If he has an illegal surface, even if there is no umpire you can ask the referee to look at it, and let him handle it. If there is no umpire or referee (i.e. usually a practice or perhaps a league match), then you'll have to deal with it on your own, and ask him to use a legal surface, or (as often happens in practice matches), just deal with it, and decide later whether to avoid playing that person again until he gets a legal surface. Except possibly in practice, you'll rarely have to deal with a player using the same color on both sides, but this can come up. Probably the most common illegal surface is frictionless long pips, which usually comes about when an opponent takes a legal long pips and treats it (usually with heat) to make them frictionless. Unfortunately, this is difficult for umpires or referees to judge.Other types of cheating are harder to deal with. There's not a whole lot you can do if your opponent claims your edge ball missed or hit the side, or that his shot off the end or into the side hit the edge, or if he calls illegal lets or disagrees with your own rightly-called let. Of course, he may have just not seen what you saw, or perhaps you missed seeing what he saw, so don't be too quick to judge the opponent a cheater. Regardless of who is right, the only way to resolve a dispute like this is to call a let, which favors the one who is either wrong or outright cheating. It's up to you whether to call for an umpire (if available), using your own judgment over whether you think it will happen again.Now the good news about cheaters: there are surprisingly few of them. Part of this is that repeat offenders get to be known, since not only opponents but people on the sidelines see it happening, and so most who might cheat quickly stop rather than face ridicule. However, there are always a few players, even at tournaments, who are regular cheaters. They are often well known to referees, who often watch these players and are quick to assign an umpire if needed. I've played tournaments where well-known cheaters informally had full-time umpires assigned to their matches.There's a large overlap between cheating and poor sportsmanship, since cheating is simply a major form of poor sportsmanship. Players with poor sportsmanship outnumber actual cheaters. At tournaments there simply are not enough umpires to deal with every problem, so unless an opponent actually cheats, try to deal with most poor sportsmanship on your own.There are two types of people who have bad sportsmanship. There are those where poor sportsmanship is simply a bad habit. And there are those who do it intentionally to gain an edge.Examples of poor sportsmanship are forcing you to wait for them as they show up late; taking excessive time between points; constant complaining; any type of derogatory or belittling talk at an opponent; excessive yelling; or general bad behavior. Sports can bring out both the best and worst in people, and in many cases, it's the worst. One way to deal with most of this, if it doesn't actually break the rules, is to ignore it. Better still, become stronger because of it. If an opponent is constantly complaining or yelling, then he's obviously under great emotional stress. What a huge advantage that is for you if you are calm and relaxed!The worst type of poor sportsmanship is when it's done intentionally to gain an edge. Suppose you show up for a match, and your opponent intentionally makes you wait for him. You can't really prove he did it on purpose, but the effect is the same: you are stuck out on the court waiting for his grand entrance. Just smile to yourself, knowing the opponent is so worried about the match he feels he needs even this tiny edge - and by doing so, you gain the edge.The same is true of other types of bad behavior. Some opponents yell a lot between points; ignore it, or perhaps (if it is in your nature) occasionally yell yourself when you win a big point. The key here is that you don't want to feel intimidated by the opponent's yelling. Again, remember he's doing so because he's under emotional stress, and because he's worried about losing. So take it as a compliment, and turn it into your own edge.It's when an opponent yells directly at you that he goes completely over the line. It's one thing to raise your fist and yell "Yes!" after winning a point. It's another to raise your fist directly at your opponent while looking him in the eye. There's no real rule against this, but it's poor sportsmanship, and some umpires and referees will warn an opponent against this. The worst case I ever saw of this was when a top 13-year-old was up 2-0 in games against a top U.S. player in a best of five. It was looking like a huge upset. In the third game the top player (who was over six feet tall and towered over his opponent, who was small for his age) won the first point, walked over to the 13-year-old's side of the table, put his fist right in the kid's face, and yelled"Yaaaaaah!"I was coaching the 13-year-old, and called for the referee immediately. It turned out the referee had seen this, but rather than default the opponent as I requested, he only warned him. The kid I was coaching was badly shaken and could barely continue. He played on half-heartedly, and lost badly three straight games.How can one deal with such a situation? It's very difficult unless you already were playing with a clear mind. Then you can look at it analytically, realize how scared the opponent is of losing, and turn his outburst into your advantage. Confidence usually beats nervous displays of arrogance.Here are three simple points to remember when dealing with cheaters and poor sportsmanship.If possible, call an umpire. But be ready to deal with it on your own if necessary.Calling the score loudly every point will deter most score-changing cheaters as well as those who simply forget the score.Always remember it is their fear of you that causes them to act this way. Turn that to your advantage with your own confident play.Last of all, there are those who read the above, and are copiously taking mental notes on how to use cheating and poor sportsmanship to gain an edge. I have one word for you:DON'T!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/907title: June 4, 2012 - Serving Short with Spindate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players face a devastating choice: Should you serve with lots of spin, with the serve going long and allowing the opponent to loop, or should you sacrifice spin, even serving with no spin, so you can keep the serve short? Actually, you can do both. In fact, the spinnier the serve, the easier it is to keep short.Nearly every coach will tell you to first learn to serve with great spin. Holding back on the spin so you can serve short is a good way to develop a bad habit. When you can get great spin on the ball,thenyou learn to serve short - but this happens automatically. To get maximum spin, you need to whip the racket into the ball at full speed (using the arm to get the playing hand moving, and snapping the wrist into the ball just before contact) but barely graze the ball. Nearly all of the energy from your arm and wrist goes into spin. When that happens, the ball barely comes off the racket - and so it is easy to keep the ball short. Those who have difficulty serving short with spin are having trouble mostly because they are not grazing the ball finely enough - and so the solution isn't to serve with less spin; it's to serve withmorespin by grazing the ball more.The other reason a spinny serve might go long is the contact point is too high, which also leads to the serve being too high. Once you are grazing the ball very finely, you need to learn to serve it low with a low contact point, and learn where to bounce it on each side of the table for varying depths. If you barely graze the ball, you'll not only maximize the spin but since nearly all your energy is going into spin, you'll find yourself almost struggling to get the ball to reach and go over the net - which is a good thing. It means the serve will be short and spinny.The ideal spin serve will, if given the chance, bounce twice on the opponent's side of the table, with the second bounce as close to the endline as possible. Sometimes a super-short serve is effective (which might bounce three or more times on the opponent's side, given the chance), as it forces the opponent to reach well over the table, but super-short serves are also easier to flip, push short, or quick-push at an angle. Many players use "tweeny" serves, where the second bounce is right around the endline, and the receiver is never quite sure if it will come off the end or not.Once you have a true spin serve that you can serve short, that's when I'd recommend adding no-spin serves as a variation, and focusing on keeping this and the spin serves very low, with the second bounce near the endline. Serving no-spin when there's little threat of spin isn't as effective after the first few times. No-spin becomes far more effective when it can be done with a spin motion, when there's a threat of spin. (How do you serve no-spin with a spin motion? Several ways, but primarily by contacting the ball near the handle, where the racket travels slowly even in a vigorous serve.) A no-spin serve with a vigorous motion is called "heavy no-spin." Seriously!It's easier to serve short backspin or no-spin than to serve short sidespin or topspin, or various combinations of these two. So many players fall into the habit of serving just backspin or no-spin when they want to serve short. This greatly limits their options, and makes things a lot easier for the opponent. Well-disguised backspin and no-spin serves are effective, but they are often even more effective if you can throw sidespin and topspin serves into the mix.At the beginning/intermediate level, I recommend a player who has difficulty serving short with spin to add a simple short backspin serve, with the focus on keeping the ball low with as much backspin as possible while still keeping the ball short. This simple backspin serve should be a temporary serve, used only so the player doesn't spend all his time serve & blocking. (Also, since most players will push it back long, you get to practice your serve and loop a lot.)  Roughly speaking, by the time a player is 1800, a well-coached player should be able to serve with good spin and keep it short. By the time he's 2000, he should have varied spin serves that go short. By the time he's 2200 he should have varied and deceptive serves that go short. (He should also be able to do all this with long serves.)But you don't have to wait until you're 1800, or 2000, or 2200 to do these things. There are many examples of players who really worked at their serves early on (both short and long), and were able to compete with "stronger" players because of this - and because of that stronger competition, they improved faster. Why not you?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/898title: March 28, 2012 - Make a Game of Your Weaknessesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the best ways to improve is to make a game that zeroes in on your weaknesses and forces you to improve them. There's nothing like a little fun competition to bring out your best!For example, suppose you have a weak backhand counter-drive. Here's a game I've played with students for years, spotting points to make it competitive. I put a box, towel, or other object around the middle of the table so that my opponent has to aim for my backhand to keep the ball in play. Then we play backhand-to-backhand games, where either of us starts the rally by serving straight topspin, then we go at it, backhand-to-backhand. If the ball hits the box or towel, or goes to the other side of it, then they lose the point. If a player plays anything other than a backhand drive, they lose the point. The rallies become fast and furious - and the backhands improve!!!Need work on your loop or block? Play a game where one player loops everything, the other blocks. You can do this either all crosscourt or all down the line (using a box or towel to block off the target area, as with the backhand-backhand game), so players know where the ball is going and so can focus on developing the loop or block. (At the advanced levels, you can do this where players can loop or block anywhere.) Alternate version - the blocker is allowed to smash or counterloop if he sees a weak loop. Another alternate version - both players battle it out counterlooping.If you need work on your pushing, then play an all-pushing game with someone. Server serves backspin, and play out the rally, backspin only.Want to learn to push short and low? Here's a great way to do that. Take turns serving short backspin, with both players pushing short. (Pushes can go anywhere.) If either player thinks the push is going to go long (i.e. wouldn't bounce twice if given the chance), he lets the push go, and if it's long, he wins the point; if it bounces twice, he loses the point. If a player pops a push up, the opponent is allowed to smash or flip kill it, but must win the point on one shot; if the opponent returns it (even by lobbing), then he wins the point. And, of course, if a player misses his push he loses the point.One of my favorite games is the serve and attack game, which forces you to be very aggressive on your serve. Play a regular game except both players are allowed only two shots after the serve to win the point. There's nothing like the knowledge that you have to follow your serve with an attack to focus your mind on doing so - and thereby learning effective serve and attack patterns. It also developed your receive as you look for ways to stop the opponent's attack on his serve.So examine your game, decide what weaknesses need work, and invent a game that'll force you to turn this weakness into a strength out of sheer competitiveness.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/883title: March 21, 2012 - Forehand Deception with Shoulder Rotationdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Whether you are hitting or looping, you should normally line up your shoulders when you backswing on the forehand so that the shoulders roughly aim in the direction you are hitting towards. This maximizes your hitting zone and allows you to stroke naturally through the ball. If you don't rotate the shoulders back enough, you'll have an abbreviated stroke, costing you control and power. (The reverse is less often a problem, but if you do rotate the shoulders back too much, then the stroke becomes too long and cumbersome to control, as well as taking too long in a fast rally.)So a top priority in developing the forehand is proper shoulder rotation. But once the shot is developed and the shoulder rotation natural, you can use this very shoulder rotation to deceive an opponent.Imagine lining up to hit or loop a forehand crosscourt from your forehand side. You line the shoulders up during the backswing, and are about to start the forward swing. Your opponent sees your shoulder rotation, sees that they are lined up to hit crosscourt, and instinctively moves to react to a crosscourt shot since most players hit the ball wherever their shoulders line up to hit. Then, at the last second before starting your forward swing, you rotate the shoulders back a bit more, line them up for a down-the-line shot, and then hit down the line. Instant free point.The key is that instant of "hesitation" where you have stopped your backswing with the shoulders lined up crosscourt, where you let the opponent react, and then the final extra bit of shoulder rotation before going down the line. The timing is surprisingly easy as long as you focus on lining up the shoulders properly for whatever direction you are going.The shot can also be done with the forehand from the backhand side, where you aim down the line and at the last second go crosscourt. In both cases you are faking to the left (for a righty), but going to the right.The alternate version is to line up your shoulders to go down the line from the forehand side, and simply rotate the shoulders forward more during the forward swing so that you hit crosscourt. Or from the backhand side, line up the shoulders to go crosscourt and go down the line. In these two cases, you are faking to the right (for a righty), but hitting to the left.When doing these deceptive shots, note that some opponents automatically cover the wide crosscourt angle no matter how you line up your shoulders. Against this type of player you should mostly fake crosscourt before going down the line. Some might be so ingrained to cover the crosscourt angle that no deception is needed, just go down the line. But when/if they adjust to that, then you can fake the down the line and go crosscourt.One consequence of the tendency for some opponents to cover the wide crosscourt angle is that it is sometimes less effective to fake down the line and then go crosscourt, since the opponent might be ready for that. This is especially true when doing a forehand from the backhand side, where even if you fake it down the line many opponents still guard the crosscourt angle. On the other hand, if you rotate your shoulders way back to fake down the line from the forehand side, most opponents tend to react to this down the line fake, leaving the crosscourt angle open. This is because few players over-rotate the shoulders (which is essentially what you are doing here), and so opponents are more likely to fall for this.There are other ways of misdirecting an with your forehand. For example, you can learn to hit inside-out, where your shoulders aim left (for a righty) but your arm and wrist twist back at the last second and you go to the right, often with sidespin. However, that takes tremendous timing, and while many top players master the shot (especially when looping, where they have extra topspin to pull the shot down if it isn't timed perfectly), the simple last-second shoulder rotation allows you to get almost the same misdirection without developing the difficult timing of that inside-out shot.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/877title: May 14, 2012 - Returning the Tomahawk Serve and Lefty Pendulum Servedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:This is the forehand serve where you serve with the racket tip up, and contact the ball on the right side so it curves to the left, and the spin makes the ball come to your right off the opponent's paddle. (This is for a righty. It's the same breaking spin as a lefty's forehand pendulum serve.) The serve normally has a combination of corkscrewspin and sidespin.It's awkward for many to take a ball spinning away from them on the forehand side and aim to their right, especially if the ball is short - try it and you'll see. Until you reach the advanced levels, nearly everyone returns this serve crosscourt toward the opponent's forehand side, and often they miss by going off the side to their left, or they allow the opponent to camp out on the forehand side.Now think about this. Have youevermissed returning this serve by returning off the right side? Probably not. So just take it down the line, to the backhand, knowing the sidespin will keep you from going off the side. Contact the back of the ball, perhaps slightly on the left side, so that the ball goes to the right, down the line.Keep the racket relatively high - don't lower it as you chase after it as it bounces and spins away from you, or you'll end up lifting the ball high or off the end. Better still, don't chase after it - anticipate the ball jumping away from you and be waiting for it, like a hunter ambushing his prey. It's often this last-second reaching for the ball that both loses control and forces the receiver to hit the ball on the right side, thereby making down-the-line returns impossible, with many returns going off the side to the left.When the tomahawk serve is deep, it is often easier to loop down the line because by doing so you don't have to overcome the incoming sidespin so much.   When looping this type of sidespin crosscourt you contact the ball somewhat on the far side (the right side of the ball), going with the incoming spin, and so you have to overpower it. It's almost like looping against a backspin. If you take it down the line, you contact the ball more on the back, and so you are going against the spin, and so it's like looping a topspin. Just as when looping against topspin you don't have to lift the ball much when going down the line, so the table isn't in the way, and you don't have to overcome the incoming spin as you'd do against a backspin.Because the table is in the way, many players compensate by rolling the ball back softly. If you place it well, you can get away with this. However, another way to handle this is to loop it aggressively, so you don't have to lower the racket below table level, so the table isn't in your way. This especially works if you loop crosscourt, since you may be able to backswing from the right side of the table. If you loop down the line the table may get in the way a bit more. As noted in the previous paragraph, the key when going crosscourt is that you have to overcome the incoming spin with your own topspin.Finally, if you simply can't do anything aggressive with this serve, use placement and deception. Aim one way, and at the last second return the serve softly (and perhaps quicker off the bounce) the other way. For example, aim to the server's forehand, which is where he expects it, and then at the last second just pat the ball down the line. This pretty much takes the server's forehand out of play. If his backhand is stronger, try the reverse.Note that the tomahawk serve is rarely used at the higher levels. (Though there are a few who specialize in it.) There's a reason for this; it's generally easier to read the spin off this serve (the wrist motion is more limited) and there's generally less variation than from other serves. Sure, you might have trouble with this serve the first few times an opponent pulls it on you. But after you've seen it a few times, and made adjustments, you should be able to take the initiative off this serve, and force most servers to use other serves.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/871title: May 7, 2012 - How to Play and Practice with Weaker Playersdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:In some table tennis club in Lake Wobegone, all the players are above average and you never play a weaker player. But the rest of us have to make do playing and practicing with whoever is at our club. And often that means playing and practicing with weaker players.Some recoil at the idea. It's almost a mantra for many to say, "I want to play stronger players." And it helps tremendously to play stronger players if you want to improve rapidly. But you also need to play matches with weaker players, and you can get good practice with them as well. Here's why.Stronger players tend to dominate the points, and if you only play them there's a tendency to develop a game that reacts to what the opponent is doing rather than forcing your game on the other. (This can be true for both matches and practice drills.) It's also harder to try new things against a stronger player since new things aren't usually developed yet and so don't work too well against better players. It's against weaker players that you can try out new things before they are ready to try against stronger players. Sure, you can try out new things against stronger players, but since you are new to these new things, you won't be very good at it, and may not get very good feedback since the stronger player will likely dominate against it.For example, suppose you want to develop your short push against an opponent's short serve. Against weaker players you'll see weaker serves whose spin you can read, and develop control in dropping them short - and soon you'll be ready to try it out against stronger serves. If you start out against stronger serves you'll have more trouble reading the spin, and so rather than focusing on developing your ball control, you'll be forced to do two things at once - read the spin and control the ball. When developing something new, you want to focus on the new thing so you can perfect that aspect.Or suppose you want to work on your loop. Against weaker players you can focus on good technique. Against a stronger player, any loop that's not strong might get smashed, counterlooped, or jab-blocked for a winner, putting pressure on you to go for stronger loops when you aren't ready to do that yet.The other thing you can do in a practice game against a weaker player is to pit the weaker aspects of your game against their strengths. Or use simple serves and receives and try to win strictly by rallying or by attacking without the benefit of your better serve & receive. Or play nearly everything to their stronger side. In all these ways you create a stronger, more competitive opponent, and can get better practice.You can get good drilling practice with weaker players as well. Rather than working on speed, focus on consistency and good technique. Do longer drills at a steady pace as you develop and hone your shots. Do drills that take advantage of the weaker player's strengths. Keep the drills simple so your opponent can focus on a few things and better react to your shots. Many players improved dramatically this way despite drilling mostly with weaker players. I know - long ago I went from 1850 to 2100 in two years practicing regularly with 1800 players, and rarely getting to play anyone stronger. It's a matter of making the most of what you have - and you'll be surprised at how much a practice partner or playing opponent has if you take advantage of their strengths rather than harp on their weaknesses and lower level of play.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/865title: April 30, 2012 - Chalk Up Wins with Chop Blocksdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:What is a chop block? It is a block with backspin. Since long pips and (usually) hardbat automatically returns topspin as backspin, it is the norm for those surfaces. But with inverted (as well as short pips to a lesser degree), a topspin ball is normally catapulted back with some topspin.But what if the inverted blocker were to chop down on the ball at contact, thereby returning the incoming topspin as backspin? That is a chop block, and it can cause havoc with an opponent's timing.Many players thrive in fast topspin rallies, using your own fast topspin balls to loop, counter-hit, or block back everything aggressively.  A sudden chop block against a topspin ball can completely throw off their timing. Instead of a fast ball jumping out into their hitting zone, the ball dies in front of them, and there's no topspin for them to counter against. The shot is especially effective against loopers who back up from the table a lot, since they are often uncomfortable looping closer to the table, and this brings them out of their comfort zone.To do a chop block, simply chop down lightly as you block the incoming topspin (usually against a loop), holding the racket loosely. Your shot should go out low and soft, almost like a push. Place the ball to the corners to force the opponent to use his weaker (or more awkward against a soft ball) stroke, or to the middle to cut off angles. The shot is usually done on the backhand side, but can be done on the forehand as well. (One reason most chop blocks are done on the backhand is it is assumed you can do more effective counter-attacks on the forehand, but that's mostly true at the higher levels.)A variation is to sidespin block, where the racket moves sideways (or sideways and down) to create a sidespin or sidespin-backspin block. This is usually done on the backhand, with the racket moving right to left (for a righty), but can be done in both directions and on the forehand as well.One word of caution - you should rarely chop block twice in a row. The first one throws off an opponent's timing and catches him out of position (too far off table). The second one doesn't change the timing and the previous one already brought the opponent in. So normally follow up your chop blocks with aggressive blocks or counter-attacks. Players with long pips and hardbat often chop block over and over, but their surfaces are deader than inverted, and so they can really deaden the ball and keep it short. With inverted, it's tougher to do this over and over, and so it's usually best to use it as a variation, not the normal block.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/857title: April 23, 2012 - Reverse Forehand Pendulum Servedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The most popular serve in table tennis is the forehand pendulum serve. (Here's a55-second promo videofrom PingSkills that show both the regular and reverse pendulum serve.) With this serve, the racket tip is down as you contact the ball with a right-to-left motion (for righties). And it's a great serve - but it can be even more effective if you can vary it with the reverse pendulum serve variation.The most under-used serve in table tennis is the forehand reverse pendulum serve. This is the reverse of the normal forehand pendulum serve, with the racket moving left-to-right at contact. It seems awkward at first, but is surprisingly easy to learn.The big advantage of this serve is that your opponent doesn't know which type of sidespin you will be serving when you set up. For most players, if they set up to do a forehand serve, it's going to be one sidespin; if they set up to serve backhand, it's the reverse sidespin. Now your opponent doesn't know until just before contact which way you are going. This is a huge advantage. As they develop the serve, advanced players learn to hide which version they are going to use later and later in the serve, giving opponents more and more trouble.When you develop the serve, start with straight sidespin - it's easier. Vigorously rotate the body into the shot, and then snap the wrist just before contact. Then learn to do side-backspin and side-top, and even no-spin (which, if you have a big motion, looks spinny, causing just as many mistakes as actual spin). The serve is often most effective short to the forehand, but vary it all over the table and see what works against different opponents.Here are three tutorials on the Reverse Forehand Pendulum serve.How to do the Zhang Jike Serveby Aaron Black (1:22)Techniques Tutorial: How to serve reverse pendulumZhang Jike style (5:22)Trent Carter (#6 in Australia) demonstrates the reverse pendulum serve(1:48)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/848title: April 16, 2012 - Where to Place Your Spin Servesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:While you should vary your spin serves to all parts of the table - at least until you find out what gives your opponent trouble and what doesn't - there are certain spin serves that are generally more effective when done to specific parts of the table.The main principle to remember is that, in general, opponents will have more trouble returning a serve that spins away from them than one that spins into them. For example, when a righty serves a forehand pendulum serve to another righty (so that the ball breaks to the server's right, the receiver's left), if the ball is served to the wide backhand, the ball spins away from the receiver, and is usually harder to receive than the same serve to the forehand, where it breaks into the receiver. Similarly, a backhand or tomahawk serve to the forehand is generally more difficult to receive than one to the backhand, since it also breaks away from the receiver (to the server's left, the receiver's right). There are three reasons for this.First, a receiver has to move or reach for a serve that breaks away. This makes it trickier to control as he may be hitting on the move.Second, while the receiver may set up with his racket at the right height to receive the serve, when the ball breaks away and he moves or reaches for it there is a tendency to lower the racket. This means he will likely lift the ball too much, and either go off the end or receive soft and high.Third, to counter the incoming spin the receiver has to aim to the left to receive a ball breaking away on the backhand side, and to the right to receive a ball breaking away on the forehand side. In both cases it's more natural to aim the other way, especially on the forehand side. So countering a sidespin that breaks away is usually more awkward.Here's a simple way of visualizing this third reason. Imagine a forehand pendulum serve short to your forehand. To counteract the spin, you have to aim to the left, i.e. a normal crosscourt forehand, which is not difficult for most players. In fact, if you wanted to place this ball crosscourt you would want to aim to the left of the table, which isn't that difficult with a little practice. Now imagine a backhand or tomahawk serve short to your forehand side, so the ball is breaking away from you. To counteract the spin, you have to aim to the right, down the line - see how awkward that can be? If you wanted to take it down the line, you'd have to aim to the right of the table, even more awkward. Even advanced players often have trouble with this.There are always exceptions. Some players are good against balls that break away, and are awful against ones that break into them. Or perhaps you simply are better at one type of sidespin serve, and the opponent will have trouble with it on both sides (especially if you vary the placement), while having little trouble when you use your other, less effective sidespin serve. So experiment - but do so with the knowledge that sidespin serves are usually more effective when placed properly. (And if you haven't yet developed these spin serves, there's no time like now to start learning them!)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/842title: April 9, 2012 - 3-2-1 Placement Ruledate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Where do most players block best? On the backhand. Where do most players attack the most? To the opponent's backhand. This never made sense to me.When attacking there are three places you should normally go for: the wide forehand, the middle (the opponent’s crossover point between forehand and backhand, usually around the elbow), and the wide backhand. Most beginning and intermediate players probably attack to the backhand twice as often as to the forehand, and almost never to the middle. We’ll call it the 0-1-2 rule, i.e. they proportionately go zero times to the middle, once to the forehand, and twice to the backhand.Instead, try the 3-2-1 rule, where you proportionately go three times to the middle, twice to the forehand, and once to the backhand.(This assumes your opponent isn't able to counter-attack with his forehand consistently, as they often do at the higher levels. If they do, change your attack placement accordingly, though it also might mean your opening attack is too soft, too short, or predictable.)Few players block on the forehand as well as on the backhand, and everyone's vulnerable at the middle. So why not go where the opponent is vulnerable?There are exceptions to this rule. If you are going for a particularly difficult attacking shot from a wide corner, go crosscourt, where you have more table. (The table is 9 feet long, but about 10.3 feet crosscourt, about 15.5 inches longer, almost seven more inches on the far side.) Also, you have to take into consideration your own positioning. For example, if you are attacking with your forehand from the wide backhand corner, if you attack down the line you are vulnerable to a crosscourt block to your forehand (unless you are fast on your feet), so you might go to the middle or backhand. And, of course, if the opponent is able to consistently counter-attack with his forehand you might want to attack there less often.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/836title: April 2, 2012 - Grip and Stancedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Let's do a thought experiment. Hold a piece of paper so you hold the top with one hand, the bottom with the other. Now twist the top. Notice how the entire piece of paper twists? Now twist the bottom. Same thing. How does this relate to table tennis?Now imagine holding a table tennis player in your hands. (You are either very strong or the player is very small.) Hold his playing hand in one hand and his feet with the other. Twist his playing hand and his entire body twists. The same if you twist his feet.This is what happens when you have a bad grip or foot positioning. It twists your entire body out of proper alignment, and are the most common cause of technique problems. Most often they are not recognized as even many experienced coaches often treat the symptoms of these problems rather than recognizing the cause.This is why I strongly recommend that players should use a neutral grip (along with a proper stance) during their formative years, and usually well beyond that. (For shakehand players, a neutral grip means the thinnest part of the wrist lines up with the racket. If the top is tilted away from you when you hold the racket in front of you, it's a backhand grip. If the top is tilted toward you, it's a forehand grip.) A neutral grip means your racket will aim in the same direction as your body is stroking the ball. A non-neutral grip forces you to adjust your stroke in often awkward ways since the racket is aiming one way while your wrist, arm, shoulder, etc., are aiming another direction. This can lead to many problems.For example, a forehand grip often leads to an overly wristy forehand loop, which makes it difficult to learn to control the ball, and also makes counterlooping and looping in general against fast incoming balls tricky. It can force the back shoulder down in an awkward attempt to adjust for the naturally overly closed racket angle for this grip on the forehand, which throws the timing off for many shots. It can make the backhand too wristy as well, also making it difficult to learn to control the ball.A backhand grip may make forehand looping awkward as it tends to tighten the arm up on forehand shots as well as making it more difficult to close the racket against an incoming topspin, or to loop anywhere except crosscourt. It can force the back shoulder to hunch up in an awkward attempt to adjust for the naturally overly open racket angle for this grip on the forehand, which throws the timing off for many shots.  It can also make hitting aggressive backhands awkward since the arm's natural stroke path and the wrist no longer are aiming in the same direction. These are just a few of the problems a bad grip may cause, and there are just as many problems caused by poor foot positioning and playing stance.At the advanced levels some players do adjust their grips, taking on usually slight forehand or backhand grips. (I generally use a slight forehand grip, but only after I'd been playing ten years.) There are some technical advantages to this, butonlyafter you have ingrained proper stroking technique.Similarly, make sure you are in at least a slight forehand stance when hitting forehands (i.e. right foot slightly back for righties, making it easier to rotate your shoulders back as you backswing), and a neutral stance when hitting backhands (feet roughly parallel to the table). Advanced players sometimes adjust their stance based on their playing style, and may play forehands from a nearly neutral stance or backhands from a forehand or backhand stance, but again, I recommend against this until you have ingrained proper stroking technique. For example, if you keep your feet parallel when hitting forehands when developing your strokes you'll likely end up with a short, jerky forehand (whether hitting or looping) that uses only the front part of your forehand hitting zone.Also make sure the feet aren't too close together as this leads to balance problems when looping or hitting with power. The feet should also be at least slightly angled away from each other, with the front of the right foot angled to the right, the front of the left to the left. If the feet are parallel, then it will be difficult to make quick body rotations when you backswing, especially on the forehand side, as well as balance problems on power shots.Even at the advanced levels players often have trouble with a specific stroke because of their grip or stance. Because they've played this way so long they don't even recognize the cause of their problem, and most often they are destined to an eternity of stroking like a crinkled piece of paper. In a few cases they realize what the cause is, and fix the problem, which often simply means going back to a more neutral grip or adjusting the foot positioning.Like a piece of paper, if you get the top and bottom parts right, the rest falls into place.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/826title: March 25, 2012 - The Great Scourge of Table Tennis Footwork: Leaningdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The ball goes to your forehand, you lean that way, and . . . suddenly you can't move. And so you lean more, and perhaps you are able to making a flailing, off-balance return. Then you watch a top player move to the ball, and while in perfect position, he makes a perfect forehand. What goes through your head? "He has a better forehand than me."What's wrong with this picture?This type of leaning footwork is pervasive at the beginning and intermediate levels. It happens on regular drives and loops, and even more when blocking, where players reach instead of stepping toward the ball, and wonder why their off-balanced blocks are so erratic. It's also a primary reason why so many players are unable to play from off the table. They are so used to reaching for the ball when closer to the table that when they are off the table, and have more ground to cover (but more time to do so), they fall into their old habits and lean in the direction they need to move, thereby making it impossible to actually move in that direction.If you need to move to the right, step first with the right foot. If you start by leaning to the right, then your weight is on the right foot, and you can't move it. Similarly, if you need to move to the left, step first with the left foot. If you need to move in, step in with either foot (the right foot for righties against short balls to the forehand, which are usually the tough ones to reach), but whatever you do don't just reach for the short ball (which means leaning) and then wonder why you can't reach it or are off balance if you do.There are also two ways of taking that first step when moving right or left. You can start with a short step and then shuffle both feet together, or (especially when moving to the forehand) you can start with one long step. The short step and shuffle (called "two-step footwork") is considered the norm and is the most taught method, but many or most top players start by taking one long step. (This was pointed out and shown on tape at the ITTF coaching seminar held in Colorado Springs in September, 2010.)How do you learn to step instead of lean? Practice. But not just at the table - you can practiceanywhere. Make a habit of shadow practicing your footwork - it's great practice and exercise, and you don't need a racket to do so. (But if you want to have a "racket," almost anything will do - I've been known to shadow practice with a stapler.) So leave behind the leaning and get in step by stepping.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/817title: March 19, 2012 - Fixing the Biggest Weakness in Your Gamedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Everyone has a "biggest weakness" in their game, almost by definition. Beginning and intermediate players may have many weaknesses, but there's probably a biggest. Even great players don't do everything great - it's all relative, and their biggest weakness might be something that would be a powerful strength for an intermediate player.So what should you do about this "biggest weakness"? FIX IT!!! So how do you go about doing that?The first step, of course, is really identifying this biggest weakness. Is it a stroking technique problem? Footwork? Weak serve or receive? Choking under pressure? Analyze your results and figure it out. Perhaps watch videos of yourself playing, and compare what you do with what top players do. A coach or top player might be able to help out in this analysis.Once you've identified the biggest weakness, how do you fix it? To fix a stroking or footwork problem, some might do a few practice drills, or perhaps work with a coach once or twice. If it's serve or receive, perhaps they'd work on this a few times. If they choke under pressure, they'd probably tell themselves to relax under pressure and hope that solves the problem.None of these fixes will work.The problem with a bad habit (i.e. your "biggest weakness") is that it has gotten ingrained. You aren't going to fix it with a little practice or a few sessions with a coach. (You might quickly get it right in a drill, but under match conditions?) To fix an ingrained bad habit you have to focus on it and make it your single-minded top priority to get it right. Until you spend an extended period of time - lots and lots of practice sessions - you won't be able to undo the bad habit that you've spent your playing career ingraining the wrong way.You also need to work with a coach or at least study videos of top players to see how the technique should be done. You don't want to replace a bad technique with another bad technique.You not only want to turn the bad technique into good technique; you want to turn this weakness into a strength! For example, if you have an awkward backhand, don't just aim to develop a decent backhand, where if you are successful it'll be a decent backhand, while if you are "not successful" you'll continue to have a weak backhand. Instead, aim to make it a strength. If you are successful, it'll become a strength. If you are "not successful," you'll probably end up with the decent backhand you wanted anyway - and so will be successful.To fix a bad stroking habit often you have to exaggerate the fix. For example, early in my career when I stepped around my backhand corner to attack with my forehand I wouldn't rotate around enough or bring my back foot back far enough. Because of this I could only effectively attack down the line; if I went crosscourt I had little power. To fix the problem I spent two weeks doing drills where I'd forehand hit or loop from the backhand side crosscourt with my back foot way back, and my body rotated around to the right way too much. This put me in a perfect position to attack my own forehand court (!), but not to hit to the other side. But after doing this nearly every day for two weeks, I began to naturally rotate about when I stepped around to use my forehand from the backhand side in games. After doing this exaggeration drill regularly for a few months, the problem was cured.The same exaggeration technique works with other stroking problems. Is your stroke too long or too short? Exaggerate the other way for a while. Do you block loops off the end all the time? Have someone loop to you where you focus on closing your racket so that when you do miss, it's in the net. Can't get enough spin on your serve? Practice serving on a rug (away from the table), and focus on just spinning the heck out of ball, not caring where the ball goes, and make it jump when it hits the rug. In each of these cases, if you aren't sure about technique, see a coach or video. Be creative in finding ways to exaggerate the fix or finding other ways to get it right.If your biggest weakness is sports psychology (such as choking under pressure), then read up on sports psychology or even meet with a sports psychologist. Then play simulated pressure matches where you start out each "match" at, say, 9-9 in the fifth. (The key is to convince yourself that these are tournament matches.)Once you've fixed the problem, it'll be fixed for life. Then, if you dream of becoming a much better player, find the next "biggest weakness" and focus on that. Keep doing this, and you'll leave all your rivals far behind as you move up in the table tennis world.You can spend years working halfheartedly to fix a problem in your game and never fix it. Or you can focus on the problem as your top priority for a few months and fix it, and even turn it into a strength for the rest of your playing days. Which do you choose?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/811title: March 12, 2012 - Developing a Smashdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:At the highest levels, many top players don't even bother to smash - even if the ball is eye-level high, they loop. However, for most players, a smash is a must. Here are some keys to developing a good smash, forehand or backhand.First, get some coaching or watch the top players.Here's a tutorial from PingSkills(3:58) on the forehand smash, and here's Tahl Leibovitzdemonstrating the backhand smash(1:35). It's still best to work with a coach who can figure out and fix any flaws in your technique.Second, practice. Here are two of the best smashing drills.Hard-Soft Drill. This really should be called the Hard-Medium Drill. Your partner blocks while you alternate hitting a medium drive and then a smash. As long as you keep the ball to the same spot, your partner should be able to return many of your smashes, with practice. A variation is to hit two medium drives and then a smash. This allows you to focus more on technique with the two drives. You can do this forehand or backhand.Loop and smash drill. You serve backspin to your partner's backhand, your partner pushes it back to the middle of the table, you loop to his backhand, he blocks to your forehand, you smash, then play out the point. The key here is to lower the shoulder for the loop, but keep it up for the smash. After looping, many players drop the shoulder on the next shot, and their smash will almost always go off. (Here's a short article on the topic.) There are numerous versions of this drill:You can start by serving to the backhand, forehand, or middle;Your partner can push to any pre-set spot on the table - forehand, backhand, middle, or even add some randomness by having the push go anywhere on the forehand or anywhere on the backhand side.You can loop to your partner's forehand instead of his backhand. But to keep the rally going consistently, your first loop should go to the same spot each time.Rather than free play, the smash also goes to the same spot, so your partner has a better chance of returning it, and so you have longer rallies.Your partner blocks to another place on the table, and you move there to smash.You can do this drill on the backhand side, with a backhand loop followed by a backhand smash, both from the backhand side.Third, use the smash in games. If you don't, you won't learn to use the shot in a real match. Find ways to set it up, with serves, loops, aggressive backhands, etc. Once you have a good smash, it'll not only allow you to end the point quickly when given the chance, but it'll be one more thing your opponent has to guard against - and most players aren't going to return a good smash.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/803title: March 5, 2012 - Proper Use of the Free Armdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:A lot of problems arise when players don't use their free arm properly. It's a major problem with a lot of players. Here are two common problems.First, many players let their free arm just sort of hang down instead of holding it up as a counterbalance to the playing arm. Every time they stroke the ball there is no counterbalancing arm to act as a counterweight, and so they are thrown slightly off balance with each shot. Worse, they become so used to this they don't even realize it is happening. The cure - hold the free arm up for balance at all time, wrist about as high as the elbow, and let it naturally counterbalance your playing arm. Note that this is true on backhands as well as forehands. On the forehand, the counterbalancing is more obvious. On the backhand, as you extend your playing arm out, the free hand needs to counterbalance this by naturally pulling back slightly.Second, when hitting forehands, players don't use their non-playing side. You should pull with the non-playing arm as you rotate around on the forehand. The non-playing side (the left side for righties) is just as important as the playing side when you hit a forehand. Your body can't rotate properly unless both sides rotate.Here's a videoof the two best players in the world right now, world #1 Ma Long and #2 Zhang Jike of China (15:29), playing the final of the Austrian Open in September. Watch the way they use their free arm on each shot. (Of course, you can learn a lot from this video besides just the use of the free arm!)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/795title: February 27, 2012 - Opening Up the Forehand Zonedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:A lot of players have good forehands in practice, either looping or hitting. But once a game starts, they stand facing the table, which is a backhand stance, and while their backhands are fine, when the ball goes to their forehand they mostly face the table, bringing their arm back to stroke rather than turning sideways. This leaves them with an awkward forehand stroke. They have only a small hitting zone, and this small hitting zone is jammed over the table. They have no time or space to actually do a normal forehand swing, and so end up blocking or doing awkward strokes. Their stroke is almost entirely with the arm.Afterwards, they go to the table and spend hours practicing their already-good forehand, never understanding why they are unable to use it in a game situation.The key to fixing this problem (which afflicts most players at most levels to some degree) is to learn to open up the forehand zone. This means that somehow you have to turn your shoulders so they are roughly perpendicular to the table, i.e. parallel to the flight of the incoming ball. Once in this position, you can unleash your true forehand power with control and consistency. But how do you do this in a game situation, as opposed to just facing the table and bringing the arm back?You do so by, in varying degrees, bringing your right foot back (for righties), turning at the waist, and turning the shoulders. You need a combination of all three. Players with quick feet might bring their back foot back more than others. Players with a more supple body might rotate more at the waist and shoulders. But the result must be the same - sideways to the table.The problem is how to develop this habit? Here are two suggestions.First, do a simple drill where your partner hits the ball side to side, and you alternate hitting backhands and forehands to the same spot (either partner's forehand or backhand). When the ball goes to your forehand, focus on pulling with your right side so that you rotate completely about, perhaps even exaggerating it at first. The goal is to develop this habit of opening up the forehand zone.When you are comfortable with this drill, do the same thing, but now have your partner hit the ball randomly to your forehand and backhand. Do it slow at first - the goal is to do itproperly, or you'll just re-enforce bad habits.Second, consider hitting your backhands with a slight forehand stance. You probably don't want to do this if you are looping your backhand, but for blocking and hitting many players keep their right foot slightly back, making it easier to transition to the forehand. (I often do this.) Experiment with this.Trust me, if you have a good forehand in drills, youcando it in games, as long as you actually do it in games the way you do in practice - with the full forehand zone.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/784title: February 20, 2012 - Moving opponents in and outdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most players learn early in their table tennis lives the importance of moving opponents side to side, playing the three spots - wide backhand, wide forehand, and the opponent's middle (the transition point between forehand and backhand, usually around the playing elbow). However, a quote from a Dan Seemiller camp from many years ago has always stood out for me. He said moving an opponent in and out was even more important than moving them side to side.The two main examples of this are:Serving short or pushing short, and then attacking deep, especially if you use the diagonals, i.e. go short to the forehand and attack the deep backhand, or short to the backhand and attack the deep forehand. Or in both cases, after dropping the ball short, attack the middle.Forcing an opponent off the table in a rally and then dropping the ball short with a drop shot or dead block. Again, use the diagonals when possible, dropping to the short forehand and attacking the deep backhand, or short to the backhand and attacking the deep forehand. Or in both cases, after dropping the ball short, attack the middle.In both of these cases you shouldn't always go short and then long; often it's better to go short a second time, catching the opponent as he moves back to react to the expected deep ball.These types of tactics are rare at the beginning level, are used by some at the intermediate level, and are central to most advanced games. At the recent U.S. Olympic Trials, match after match had players mixing up short serve returns and attacking serves, with the server sometimes tied up trying to cover for both. Most serves were short (or half-long, i.e. second bounce near the end line), and if it was returned short, the server would either attack or sometimes drop it short again, forcing the receiver to cover for both.Once an opponent is forced off the table, most players keep blasting the ball until they win the point. In most cases, while a short ball may set up the attack that forces the weak ball to put away, once you get that weak ball it's often better to keep attacking until you win the point. However, against a player who is returning your attacks consistently from off the table, sometimes it's better to take something off the attack to throw off the opponent's timing, and then blast the next ball. For example, if you are having trouble getting through the opponent's fishing or lobbing defense, throw in a dead block to bring him in, and then attack again with the opponent now too close to the table to defend. Dan Seemiller, both now and when he was winning his five U.S. men's singles titles, would constantly mix up strong attacks and dead blocks.So learn to turn your opponent into a marionette, and learn to yank his strings as you move him in and out.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/776title: February 13, 2012 - Those Dizzying No-Spin Servesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:A low, heavy backspin serve is difficult to attack, especially if you serve it short or to the opponent's weaker side. For that reason it is often the serve of choice for many attacking players who are looking for a passive return to attack. However, there are several problems you face with this serve. If you serve with heavy backspin, it's easy for an opponent to dig into it and push it back low and heavy - your own backspin rebounds off their open racket with backspin. If you serve it long, it's easy to loop with heavy topspin, converting your own backspin into topspin. If you serve it short, it's easy to push back short and low, making it difficult to attack. How do you overcome these problems?The answer is to develop other serves as variations, such as a good sidepin or topspin serve - and you should develop these. However, there's an easier way that most top players use, and that's to mix in no-spin serves.A key to getting heavy spin on the serve is to contact the ball near the racket tip, which is the fastest moving part of the racket when you snap your wrist into a serve for heavy spin. Suppose you use the same motion, but contact the ball near the handle, where the racket is moving much more slowly. You get an almost spinless ball. If you really exaggerate the spin motion but serve with no spin, it's a "heavy no-spin serve."Now it's more difficult for an opponent to push it back heavy as they can't use your spin against you, plus they are probably expecting backspin, and so their push pops up. If the serve goes long and they attack it, they'll likely misread it as backspin, and go off the end. If they try to push it back short, it'll likely pop up as well as go long.It's extremely important to serve no-spin very low to the net. There's no spin to directly mess up an opponent, and if it goes high, it's easy to attack. If you serve it low, it's surprisingly difficult to flip aggressively - if an opponent does attack it easily, you are probably not serving low to the net.At the higher levels, no-spin serves are the most common serve in doubles, often with backspin serves mixed in as the main variation. Since your opponent knows which court you are serving to in doubles, he is camped out ready to make a return from his stronger side. At these higher levels, deep serves are looped, short sidespin and topspin serves are flipped aggressively, and short backspin serves are dropped short and low. Since the opponent can use your own spin against you, the no-spin serve is often more effective than the spinny one. A short no-spin serve may not force as many outright mistakes, but there's no one easy way to return it effectively.So develop a no-spin serve as a variation to your spin serves, and learn to really load up the ball with so much no-spin that no opponent can possibly overcome that dizzying lack of spin you throw at them.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/768title: February 6, 2012 - Sidespin Loopsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The hooking sidespin loop had its heyday in the early 1970s, with the rise of Hungary's Istvan Jonyer, the 1975 World Men's Singles Champion. Jonyer looped with a straight arm, and would often contact the ball on the far side, hooking the ball to the left (he's a righty) with incredible sidespin. Often his racket tip would point straight down at contact, giving him essentially 100% sidespin. When players went to his forehand side, often he would looparoundthe net, with the ball barely rising above table level, and mostly rolling when it hit the far side - nearly unreturnable. Primarily because of Jonyer, the rules were changed, requiring the net to project six inches outwards. This makes around-the-net loops rare, though top players still do this shot sometimes from the very wide forehand.However, while we may never see the sidespin dominance of a player like Jonyer again, most loops do have sidespin on them. According to former U.S. Men's Coach Dan Seemiller, your typical forehand loop should be about 15% sidespin. This is the most natural loop - for most players, it would be tricky going for 100% topspin, as the racket naturally tips downward from the shoulder, and contact point is usually below the shoulder.Yet some players like to go for extreme sidespins on some of their loops, especially on the forehand side. It's a great way to mess up an opponent and set up your own shots. How and when do you do it? This is one of those shots where if you see a top player do it, it's easy to copy.The basic key for a hooking loop is contact the ball on the far side, by dropping the wrist so that the racket tip slightly down. It's generally easier doing it from the wide forehand, though you can do it from anywhere on the court. When someone blocks to your wide forehand, and you have to stretch for the ball even a little bit, it's best to get your racket outside the ball and hook it back with sidespin as well as topspin. If you do it to the opponent's wide forehand, it jumps away from him, and the sidespin will both make his timing tricky and make it difficult for him to return it to your now open backhand side, and so you'll usually get another forehand shot.The opposite of a hooking sidespin loop is a slicing one (also called an inside-out loop), which is often done with the forehand from the backhand side to the opponent's backhand side (so that it jumps away from the opponent), but it can be done from anywhere on the court. Instead of dropping the racket tip to hook the outside of the ball, you now raise your wrist so that the tip goes up, and contact the ball on your side of the ball so that it slices to the right (for a righty). This is usually a bit more difficult to learn, but once learned, it gives you a devastating one-two combo of hooking and slicing loops. Just as with a hooking loop, the slicing loop messes up the opponent's timing, and usually forces a return toward your backhand.Here's a video from PingSkillsthat demonstrates and explains hooking and slicing (he calls them fading) loops (3:08).Tired of throwing the usual topspins and backspins at your opponent? Have a little sidespin fun!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/753title: January 30, 2012 - Quick and Variable Blocksdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Someone recently asked me why it was important to block loops quick off the bounce. He thought that taking the ball quick off the bounce made it harder for the blocker to react, and made the shot more predictable for the opponent. However, it's actually easier and more consistent to block a loop off the bounce, and the lack of variation from this only happens if the blocker doesn't vary his block.You do want to block loops off the bounce. If you take it late, you have more ground to cover (often with little time to react, depending on the speed of the loop), as well as having to predict the ball's fast and low bounce off the table. Even more important, blocking quick off the bounce allows you to both rush and angle an opponent. If you take the ball late, your opponent has time to react to your shot, and the block loses its effectiveness.So how do you make your block more effective by varying it? First of all, while variation is important, consistency is most important. Your block needs to be a steady, quick over-the-table shot - think of yourself as a wall. But you can be steady and still mess up your opponent by varying your blocks.So, how can you vary your block to mess up an opponent? Here's a rundown.Steadiness: Sheer consistency, combined with quickness, will wear down an opponent. If you combine steadiness with at least one other variation, such as placement or change of pace, your block will be even more effective.Three placements: Your blocks should almost always go to one of the three main placements - wide forehand, wide backhand, and middle. By blocking quick off the bounce, your opponent has little time to react to these, and they all force him out of position.Deceptive placement: You can aim one way, and at the last second change directions. For example, suppose you aim your backhand block to the opponent's wide backhand (for two righties). At the last second, just bring your wrist back and block down the line to the forehand. Deceptive placement is perhaps the most under-used tactic in blocking at the intermediate level - far too often players telegraph where they are blocking early in the shot.Tactical placement: Sometimes you should hammer an opponent's weak side over and over. Or you might want to go after the opponent's middle over and over. Against others, you might want to go quick to their strong side to draw the opponent out of position, and then come back to the weak side, making them move and hit their weaker shot.Speed: Not all blocks are passive. A jab block is an aggressive block, and if placed well - see three placements above - is particularly effective. You can especially jab block against a loop that lands short. Slow, spinny loops that land short are easy to miss if you take them late, but if you take them off the bounce decisively, they are easy to jab block or even smash. To smash them, shorten your backswing.Dead block: These are great to vary the pace and throw off an opponent's timing, and are especially effective when combined with a jab block, or against an opponent who tends to back off the table. Just hold the racket loosely and let the ball rebound out slowly.Chop block: If you chop down on the ball at contact, you can dead block with backspin. This is more easily done on the backhand.Sidespin block: At contact, move the racket sideways to create sidespin. You can do this in either direction. This is another way to dead block. This is more easily done on the backhand.Topspin block: You can topspin the ball right off the bounce, both backhand or forehand, sort of a mini-loop. (Some call this the "kiss of topspin.") At the world-class level this is the most common type of block.Use block to set up attack: Blocking by itself will only take you so far. If you use your block to mess up an opponent so that you can then attack yourself, you put even more pressure on your opponent. Any time you sense your opponent will have trouble with your block, get ready to take the attack.Many or most of the above may be tricky to do at first, but that's because you haven't been doing them. Decide which variations above best fit your game. Then find time to practice them in drills, use them in practice matches, and soon they'll become second nature.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/743title: January 23, 2012 - Forcing an Opponent Out of Positiondate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:There are a number of ways to effectively force an opponent out of position. You can do this by either moving him side to side or in and out or some combination of this. In practical terms, here are ways to do so.Corners- You play one ball wide to either the forehand or backhand. As the opponent moves wide to return the shot, he either leaves the other wide corner open, or he moves to cover that side so quickly that he leaves the other corner open. (This is really two tactics, since you can start by going wide to either the forehand or backhand.)Middle- You go to the opponent's middle (playing elbow), usually aggressively so as not to set him up for an easy shot from his stronger side. If he moves to cover it with his forehand, he leaves his forehand side open, and if he moves to cover it with his backhand, he leaves his backhand side open. You either play to the open side, or if the opponent moves to cover that side too quickly, you go the other way.Short to forehand, deep to backhand- You serve or drop a ball short to the forehand, bringing the opponent in over the table. Then he's jammed over the table and vulnerable to a deep ball to the backhand. Sometimes the opponent moves so quickly to cover the wide backhand that he's vulnerable to another short ball to the forehand, or to deep to the wide forehand.Short to backhand, deep to forehand- You serve or drop a ball short to the backhand, bringing the opponent in over the table. Then he's jammed over the table and vulnerable to a deep ball to the forehand. Sometimes the opponent moves so quickly to cover the wide forehand that he's vulnerable to another short ball to the backhand, or to deep to the wide backhand.Deep to backhand against a forehand player- Against a forehand-oriented player, you play the ball deep to the backhand over and over, often by pushing, until the opponent steps around to attack with his forehand. You quick-block the ball to his wide forehand, or if he moves too quickly to cover that, come right back at his backhand again.In the scenarios given above, I've given two places to place the ball after forcing the opponent out of position. In each case there is a third option - if the opponent is hustling to cover the corners, you can go after his middle. It's hard to cover the middle when you are moving to get back into position. (This is why it is rarely a good idea to be moving back into position when the opponent is hitting the ball. It's better to be in a ready position but slightly out of position than in position but in motion.)How to apply the above? Study your opponent, and focus on using your serve and receive to set up the above, as well as doing so in rallies, and turn your opponent into a puppet - and you hold the strings!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/731title: January 16, 2012 - Larry's Six-Month Lawdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Here's Larry's Six-Month Law. If you work hard and improve, and are finally playing at a higher level in practice, you'll generally need to do this for up to six months of tournament and practice matches before you'll be able to consistently win at this level in tournaments. During those six months (and note it says, "up to"), you'll probably battle closely with players who were much stronger than you until your recent improvement, and occasionally you'll beat one, but mostly you'll lose close matches that, afterwards, you'll swear you should have won - often with good reason.What's actually happening? The problem you face is that your opponents have played at that level for a much longer period of time, and so are both psychologically and tactically better prepared to win key points than you are, since you are new to that level. You and your opponent may play the same level, but when it's close, the experienced opponent who has been doing this much longer is more confident and knows exactly what to do tactically. He knows what serve to throw at you at the end of each game, how to return your serve, where to place the ball, and he's confident that he can execute the shots needed to win. You don't have this experience, and probably aren't as sure about what to do at the end of each game. Guess who wins most of those key points?The key thing to understand is that the only thing that now separates you from your opponent is mental. When you miss a shot at a key time, and it's often the same shot you made over and over earlier, it wasn't the physical aspect that messed up, but the mental. Either you weren't confident and so messed up, or you were crossed up tactically and so were fooled into messing up. Learn from your mistakes in these close matches, pay your dues during those six months or so, and it's inevitable you'll start winning. And perhaps, just maybe, you'll be one of those players who doesn't take six months to start winning at your new level.To reiterate: The key thing to understand is that it's mostly mental. You might as well tell yourselfit's all mental, since that's pretty much true. (Here'sDora Kurimay's Table Tennis Sports Psychology page.)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/719title: January 9, 2012 - Proper Care of Your Racketdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:There are fewer things in life nicer than those first few shots with a brand new sheet of rubber right out of the package. This is especially true with a grippy sheet of inverted sponge, with its surface practically grabbing the ball and throwing it back at the opponent with topspin or whatever type of spin you choose.If you take proper care of the inverted surface, your rubber can do this for a long time. However, many players do not clean their rubber, and so dust and grime collects on the surface, leading to a non-grippy, often inconsistent hitting surface. The ball starts to slide on the surface, and you lose spin and consistency.You should clean your rubber after each time you play. Some do so with plain water, and that mostly works, but it doesn't really get off any oils that collect on the surface. That's why the gods of table tennis created rubber cleaners! Use the rubber cleaner at least somewhat regularly, and wash with water at other times, and the surface will retain its grippiness. I especially use rubber cleaner in tournaments or for important matches at the club, i.e. all of them.With rubber cleaner, just spray the cleaner on and wipe with a towel. To clean with plain water, wet a corner of your towel and wipe the surface with that, then wipe dry with the rest of the towel.However, it's not enough to just clean the surface between playing sessions - it gets dirty during a session as well. If you watch top players, you'll see a strange thing - many of them will occasionally blow on their racket and then wipe it off with a towel or on their pants or shirt. (Some will wipe it off with the palm of their hand near the bottom, which apparently is a non-oily part of the hand.) The idea is that by breathing on the paddle, you create slight moisture, enough to wipe off the dust and dirt. I do this regularly, usually every five minutes or so, and recommend you do so as well.It's especially important to wipe your paddle off regularly if you have a new ball. New balls come with some sort of powder all over them, which leaves a dusty mark on your paddle which takes away the grippiness. With a new ball, I wipe the paddle off (using the breath method) every few points.If you have a pips-out surface, wiping it with a cloth will help clean the surface of the pips, but it won't do a complete job, especially since most pips do not have flat surfaces. For pips, you might need to clean it with a toothbrush.You should keep your racket covered when not in use. Normally you do this with a racket case. You can also keep in a plastic bag, but that practically screams out "amateur!" If you leave the racket out, the surface will deteriorate more rapidly in the air.If you have a long trip to the club or tournament on a cold day, keep the racket inside the car with you. You don't want the racket to get cold, which will make it dead until it warms up, which can take a surprisingly long time. I've learned this the hard way.Take good care of your racket, and it will take good care of you!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/712title: January 2, 2012 - Pushing and Looping Deep Backspindate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you want to play table tennis at a high level, you really should learn to loop any deep backspin ball. There are, of course, exceptions, but they are few (such as choppers and some blockers). On the forehand side, where you have a big hitting zone, you should never really need to push against a long backspin. Think of this as a given - deep backspin to your forehand means you forehand loop. Don't even think about it, just do it.On the backhand side, ideally you should also loop any deep backspin. However, there are times where you might get caught too close to the table against a quick, aggressive push, and since the body is more in the way on the backhand than on the forehand, you might have to push. Also, you can get away with pushing on the backhand more because you have an angle into the opponent's backhand, where most opponents aren't as good attacking. Of course, some have great forehands from the backhand side, and others have great backhand loops, so it all depends on the opponent.Learning to loop these deep backspin is a technique issue, and you should work with a coach or watch the top players to learn how to do this. However, here's one important tip - if you want to be ready to loop against deep backspin, hold your racket relatively low. Many players hold their rackets too high and so are rushed trying to get them down to loop.Since you are going to loop deep pushes every chance you can, should you learn to push against deep backspin? On the backhand side, yes, since most players do have to do this at least sometimes. On the forehand, probably not. You may learn to push with the forehand by pushing back and forth against deep balls, but that's just to develop the shot. At the higher levels, the forehand push is done almost always against a short backspin only. Against deep backspin, many top players literally never forehand push, and if asked to do so (perhaps in a demonstration), some find the shot awkward to do since it's not something they ever practice.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/706title: December 26, 2011 - Balance is a Habitdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Recently I had an epiphany. It wasn't anything that wasn't obvious, but it was something that underlined a primary difference between hackers and pros - or more generally, between lower-level and higher-level players. And that is the habit of balance.While practicing with a student, I hit a net ball to the right-handed student's forehand side. The student immediately reached for the ball. This put his weight on his right foot. Since he could no longer step with that foot (try it, you'll see), he was forced to lunge for the ball. He managed to reach it and popped it back on the table, an easy winner for any decent opponent. On the very next point, the student hit a net-edge to my forehand. When it nicked the net, without thinking I stepped toward where the ball was going. When it hit the edge, I took an immediate step sideways toward the ball's new direction, and without ever losing balance, reached the ball and made an easy and effective return.The epiphany was that I didn't have to think about getting the net-edge, or reach for it, or even make a weak return, though that is often the result. Thehabitof balance took over, and so rather than lunging toward the ball, the years of training took precedence, with the result that I stepped to the ball, and reached the ball in perfect position to make the shot.This is not a matter of practicing balance while returning nets or edges. It's a matter of practicing balanceall the time, always stepping to the ball, always balanced, rarely lunging. (There are rare occasions where you step to the ball and then have to make a last-second lunge at a ball that's otherwise out of reach, but that's as a last resort, and only after stepping first. And you'll be surprised at how balanced you can be even when lunging.)So develop the habit of always staying balanced, and stepping toward shots, not reaching. This makes it easy to move in any direction and ready to make a strong shot. It's that first move - stepping that keeps you in balance versus reaching that puts you off balance - that makes the difference.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/702title: December 19, 2011 - Time-Out Tacticsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Time-Out TacticsEach player is allowed a one-minute time-out during a tournament or league match. (Often a coach calls the time-out, but the player can waive that off if he doesn’t want one at that time, except in a team match.) When should you call a time-out? Here are some scenarios where you should call a time-out—but remember, you are only allowed one, so choose carefully. I’ve put them in order of priority. There are also times you shouldn’t call a time-out, such as when you are in the zone (i.e. focused and playing well), and a time-out might only disturb your concentration. If a coach calls a time-out and you really, really don’t think you need one (and want to save it for later), then waive him off. (You might want to let him know in advance you might do this.)When to Call a Time-outWhen losing focus before a key point. This is the most important time to call a time-out. A time-out is a good way to get your concentration back.Tothink about or discuss tactics at a key point. Generally do this when you are about to serve, since you have complete control over choosing your two serves. If you have a coach, he might be able to help choose two serves to use. Call it when you are receiving mostly if you have a good idea what the opponent will serve, and are debating how you should return that serve. Or call it to think or discuss any other tactical plans. It’s also valuable to call a time-out when you are winning a relatively close game (especially late in a match), such as at 10-8 or 9-7, so as to clear your mind, think tactically, and close out that game. This is often when the Chinese team calls time-outs.When falling behind in a key game. It’s useful to call a time-out if you lose the first game and are falling behind in the second (since you absolutely do not want to fall behind 0-2), or if you have already lost two games and will lose the match if you lose another. The key is not to wait until you are way behind; instead, call the time-out when you are still relatively close and can still find a way to come back. The time-out allows you to make sure you are focused and to rethink your tactics. It’s also a good way to give your opponent a chance to cool off if he’s playing well—there’s nothing wrong with calling a time-out in hopes of disturbing his concentration or throwing off his rhythm.Desperation tactic. Far too many players call time-outs as a desperation tactic near the end of a match when they are way behind and are pretty much out of it, but this rarely leads to a win. If you are losing badly, why wait until you are way down in the last game? It’s far better to call the time-out earlier in the hope of not being in this situation, where the time-out will rarely help.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/697title: December 12, 2012 - Depth Control of Servesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:One of the most under-practiced aspects of serving is depth control. Most intermediate and advanced players know that serving short stops an opponent from looping. As players advance, they begin to see the advantage of serving short with the second bounce as deep as possible. This makes it harder for the opponent to flip or drop short, to return at a wide angle, or rush the server.As they advance, players also begin to see that a deep serve that goes very deep, so the first bounce is near the opponent's endline, is much more effective than a long serve that bounces more in the middle of the table. The deeper the bounce, the more you jam the receiver, force him off the table, cut off angles, and give yourself more time to react to his shot. (Deep serves can either be spin serves, fast serves, or a combination of both.)You'd think that players would really focus on controlling the depth of their serves, making sure that the second bounce of a short serve and the first bounce of a long serve are both near the opponent's endline. And yet few players really take the time to really learn to do this.Draw a line on the far side of the table about four inches from the end, a few inches more for beginners. (You can use chalk, or perhaps just put a string across the table.) Now get a bucket of balls, and practice your serves - but on every serve, make sure that either the first or second bounce lands in the last four inches of the table. (Make sure that you don't hold back on the spin on your spin serves or you defeat the whole purpose here. If you have trouble creating spin, focus on that before you worry too much about serving short with spin.) Don't consciously aim; learn the feel of the serves that go the proper depth, and visualize doing it each time just before you actually do the serve. Ingrain the feel, and you'll ingrain the serve.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/691title: December 5, 2011 - Going to the Well Too Oftendate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you find a tactic that really gives your opponent trouble, do some serious thinking about how often to use it. You may have two options: 1) use the tactic to win one game; or 2) use the tactic to win the match. If you want to squeeze an entire match out of the winning tactic, then you don't want to overuse it and allow the opponent to get used to it.For example, suppose you have a serve your opponent misses over and over. Unless the opponent is brain dead, if you overuse this serve, he'll get used to it. He'll also expect the serve at key moments - so you have to decide whether it will still be effective at that time. If he hasn't made many good returns of it in the past, then he'll probably have trouble with it under pressure as well, so most often use it at these key, pressure-packed points. When he does make a good return of this serve, hold back on it for a while, and then surprise him with it again.If you only have one serve that gives the opponent trouble, perhaps you can turn this into two by doing some variation of the serve? A different spin, speed, or depth, or even serving from a different part of the table might be enough variation to allow you to use it more often.Suppose an opponent with a big loop keeps missing when you push heavy to his backhand. Do you really want to warm up his attack against this by giving it to him over and over? I've had many coaching experiences where a player went to the well too often, and tactically had nothing left in the last game. I once coached a match where the opponent had a huge backhand loop off a deep push to his backhand to follow up his short backspin serves. In the first game, the opponent missed over and over. Between games I suggested using the tactic at the start of game two, then holding back on it a bit, perhaps pushing more to the forehand, pushing short, or flipping. Instead, the player I was coaching pushed long to the backhand over and over, took an early lead - and then suddenly the opponent's big backhand loop started hitting. Afraid to push deep to the backhand, my player started pushing to the forehand, where the opponent was even stronger. Afraid this late in the match to start flipping or pushing short, my player fell apart, and the rest of the match was a rout.It's important to come up with several winning tactics, and vary them. Experiment early in the match, and find what works. If you have one serve that works, find a variation of it so you have two. If you have two serves that give an opponent trouble, go back and forth between them somewhat randomly, mixing in other serves as well, perhaps looking for a third effective variation. If you build up a lead, perhaps temporarily retire one of these serves for later. But be careful - don't blow a lead by failing to use what was a winning tactic. It's all about judgment.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/683title: November 28, 2011 - Message to Lower-Ranked Players from Higher-Ranked Playersdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you want to score more points against us, focus on consistency, placement, and steady attacks instead of wild swings. Stop hitting everything crosscourt, go after my playing elbow more, and change directions at the last second so we don't know where you're hitting the ball five minutes before you hit it. And for god's sake, develop some good serves, both long and short ones. While you're at it, work on your receive - it takes practice, but if you focus on control, you'll get that control. If you do all this, and can put the ball away when you get an easy shot, you'll start beating us and we'll teach you the secret handshake. That is all.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/675title: November 21, 2011 - Remember the Good Shotsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When you make a series of shots and then miss one, remember the feel of the ones that hit, not the one that missed. It's the ones that hit that you want to ingrain. Think about the miss only if you do it over and over, and then only think analytically to figure out what the problem is, and as briefly as possible. Then forget about the misses and think about the feel of the good ones.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/668title: November 14, 2011 - Forehands from the Backhand Cornerdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The primary danger of attacking with the forehand from the backhand corner (usually with a loop) is that you are leaving the forehand side open. Yet, you don't have to be a speed demon to cover that shot, though that helps. Balance and technique are more important. Here are keys to how to play the forehand from the backhand side without getting caught on the wide forehand. (Note - the advantage of the forehand from the backhand side is that it's usually easier to generate power with the forehand.)Balance. Often a player is in such a rush to step around that they are off-balance when they finish the shot. Others simply follow through way off to the side. In both cases, by the time they have recovered their balance, it's too late. Imagine a pole through your head, and as much as possible rotate around that pole. This gives you great torque yet leaves balanced and in the same position as when you started the shot.Depth. If your shot lands short, it's easy for the opponent to block aggressively to your forehand. If you keep your shots deep, you have a lot more time.Placement. If you put the ball very wide to the opponent's backhand (for righties), they have no angle into your forehand. In general, go down the line only for winners, since you'll be wide open to an aggressive angled block to your forehand.Speed. The harder you loop, the less time you have to recover. Often it's a good idea to loop slow and deep from the backhand side, since the slowness and depth of your own shot gives you time to recover. Alternatively, loop kill so the ball rarely comes back, so you don't have to worry about the wide forehand as much. It's those medium-speed loops that are regularly blocked to the wide forehand for winners.Backhand loop. There's nothing like a backhand loop from the backhand side to keep you in position!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/660title: November 7, 2011 - How to Ace an Opponentdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:A fast, down-the-line serve from the backhand corner (normally done with a forehand pendulum service motion) is a valuable serve. It's great at catching righty forehand loopers off guard as they look to loop your serve from the backhand corner. It's also sometimes good against more neutral players, as they aren't used to fast serves to the forehand and so can be erratic against it. It's even effective against lefties, who are often guarding against serves wide to their forehand, and so are vulnerable to this sudden serve to their wide backhand. Against lefties, however, you'd look to ace them by going crosscourt to their forehands, though you are less likely to get an ace as players generally guard the crosscourt angle. (Lefty servers, this serve is effective for you as well - but I'll let you work out the specifics.) So develop this serve or you will be handicapping yourself against some players.If you aren't sure how to do the serve, ask a coach or top player to demonstrate. But the key is to fake as if you are serving crosscourt, then at the last second change directions and serve fast topspin down the line. Contact point should be a bit behind the table so that the first bounce can be near your own end-line, which gives the serve the maximum amount of table to drop and hit the other side. (This is true for fast crosscourt serves as well.)Pick and choose when to use this serve. Often you can tell by the receiver's stance and body language if he's looking to step around. Even if he's not stepping around, if a receiver looks a bit flat-footed, he's probably vulnerable to this serve.Once you can do the serve effectively, it's time to make it even more effective. Here are two ways you can do that. First, you can use spin, either sidespin either way or extra topspin. If you do, make sure to put more power into the serve so that you don't sacrifice much speed for spin. Extra topspin pulls the ball down and allows you to serve even faster.Second, contact the ball with the racket still aimed at the righty receiver's backhand, but hit it down the line with sort of a slapping sidespin (your racket going from right to left at contact). This is my favorite. Typically the first time I go down the line, I do it the "easy" way, changing the racket direction at the last second. Now they are watching for that last second racket change, so I don't give it to them. By keeping the racket aimed to their backhand, you catch them moving to cover that shot, and their forehand side is open.Once you've done a fast down-the-line serve, the rest of the match the opponent is guarding against it, and guess what? All your other serves become a bit more effective.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/649title: October 31, 2011 - When to Reactdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Have you ever studied your opponent to see exactly when in his strokes he commits to a specific placement? There really are two important points in the swing.The first is when the opponent has committed to the placement, but you don't know where yet. Normally you would not react to this, but sometimes, against a predictable opponent (which means most players), you can anticipate. For example, if you serve a deep breaking serve to an opponent's backhand, most likely he'll return it to your backhand. So you might anticipate this, and at the instant when the opponent has committed his direction - but hasn't actually telegraphed the direction - you might anticipate his return by stepping over to attack with your forehand. Don't overdo this, but it's a definite tactical advantage if you can do this sometimes.The second important point in the swing is when the opponent has telegraphed where his placement will be. You should learn to observe this so you can move the instant you can see the direction. Many players don't move until the opponent has hit the ball, but for the large majority of players, you can see where they are going by the time they start their forward swing. At the higher levels, many players learn to hide their direction longer and to even fake one way and go another, so against players like that learn when they have really committed.The shoulders are often the giveaway for where a player is going on the forehand. Many players line their shoulders up early to hit crosscourt or down the line, and it's like they have a big sign across their shoulders saying where the shot is going. When you first learn the forehand, this is fine, but as you advance, learn a little subtlety and deception. For example, from the forehand side, rotate the shoulders way back as if you are going down the line, then at the last second whip about and go crosscourt. Or set up to go crosscourt, and at the last second rotate the shoulders back more so you can go down the line. Or simply cock your wrist back at the last second and go inside-out down the line. These are easier shown then explained - have a top player or coach show you how to do these shots.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/642title: October 24, 2011 - Feet at more than shoulder widthdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:There's a long history of players experimenting with how wide to keep their feet. There have been times where the trend was to keep the feet closer together, no more than shoulder width. However, that has pretty much died out. Suffice to say that if you watch videos of all the top players in the world, one thing that stands out is that just about all (I'd say all but I haven't had time to watch every single player) keep their feet rather wide. This gives them stability and balance when making shots, as well as lowering the center of gravity, which makes quick movements easier. There's a simple way to verify this, and see what the world-class players really do. Go to theITTF world ranking list. Pick a player. Then go toyoutube, paste the player's name in (and perhaps the words "table tennis" afterwards), and check the videos that come up. In general, the taller the player, the wider the stance, but even shorter players keep the feet wider than shoulder width.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/634title: October 16, 2011 - You must attack those steady deep backspin serve returnsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many opponents push back deep any backspin serves, and will often even do so against a sidespin or even topspin serve by chopping down on the ball, often right off the bounce. And so you get a predictable backspin return off your serve.If the opponent is going to give you these slow, predictable backspin returns, then you must take advantage of it. This means starting all of these rallies off with a serve and loop, either forehand or backhand. Simply decide you are going to do it, and do it. Yes, easier said than done, but the more you do it, the easier it becomes. You don't need a lot of speed as long as you get good spin, loop the ball deep on the table, and vary the placement to the wide backhand, wide forehand, and at the opponent's elbow.Often it's best to serve short to the middle. By serving short, it makes it difficult for the receiver to attack the serve, and so you get those predictable long push returns. By serving to the middle, you cut off the extreme angles.You should favor your stronger side - usually the forehand, though not always - but it's better to be able to attack from both wings when necessary than give away such a free attack. Don't over-anticipate the direction of the incoming push; wait and see the actual direction as a crafty opponent might aim one way and change directions at the last second.How important is it to attack these long backspin receives? I've seen top players coach matches where they were literally confused that they had to actually tell a player to do this since it seemed so obvious and second-nature to them.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/624title: October 10, 2011 - Trick Serves and Third-Ball Servesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you have a tricky serve that opponents miss or pop up over and over, that's great. However, too much reliance on this can actually hold you back. The same tricky serve that your peers mess up against might be returned more easily by stronger players, including the ones you hope to learn to beat. For example, if you have a side-top serve that many opponents push back and so pop up, stronger players, especially after they see the serve a few times, might just drive or loop it, and suddenly your serve is a disadvantage. So instead of relying on winning off the tricky serve over and over, develop a good third-ball serve, one that players at nearly all levels will return somewhat passively, allowing you to attack. Then you can use the tricky serve as a highly effective variation that even stronger players might never adjust to.Your typical third-ball serve is a short and low backspin or side-backspin, which is often pushed back, setting you up to loop (or in some cases, a regular drive). The irony is that if you do these serves well, opponents will tend to expect backspin, and so when you fake backspin but instead give side-top or no-spin (by contacting the ball near the base of the paddle but still exaggerating the serve motion), the opponent will often push and pop the ball up. Sometimes the no-spin becomes the main serve, with spin the variation, since no-spin serves are harder to push heavy or drop short than backspin, and if very low, are often harder to attack as well.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/616title: October 3, 2011 - Returning Long Serves with the Backhanddate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The key is that you have to *do something* when returning any long serve or you give the opponent a big opening. And that usually means attacking it. Against a long serve to the backhand, that usually means either backhand looping or hitting/punching a strong backhand. A player with good footwork may step around and loop with the forehand, but most can't do that on a regular basis unless they are very fast or they anticipate the serve. If the serve is fast, you can use the speed against the opponent with a punch block. If you have trouble attacking the serve, try shortening your stroke.You want to place the ball, usually wide to the corners, or (if the opponent isn't looking to attack with the forehand) a strong shot to the elbow. Shots to the middle backhand or middle forehand put little pressure on the opponent, and are often ripped.You want to hide the direction. For example, if you aim your backhand crosscourt to the wide backhand, then at the last second change and go to the wide forehand, you can catch an opponent off guard. If you aim to the wide forehand, many opponents will move to cover that, and then you can do a simple return to the backhand.You want depth. Even a weak topspin ball that goes deep can be effective if it either has topspin or is to a wide angle. (However, you don't want to rely on this - a good player might still tee off on this.) Against some players who hang back to counterloop, a shorter, softer, spinnier topspin return is more effective, but don't overdo it or they'll get used to it.A sudden chop, chop block, or sidespin block can also be effective, but only if you can control it, and usually only as a variation. If you can deaden the ball with a chop block or sidespin block, many opponents will have great difficulty. If the serve has sidespin, try sidespin blocking it back, using the opponent's own spin against him. (Go with the spin, not against it, i.e. against a forehand pendulum serve, your racket should go right to left for a backhand sidespin block.)Lastly, variation is important. If your opponent knows what you are going to do, things get pretty easy for him. Even if you are going to loop all deep serves (as most advanced players should), you should vary the placement, depth, speed, and spin, and throw in sidespin loops as well.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/605title: September 26, 2011 - Develop Your Game Around Your Playing Styledate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:(The first three paragraphs of this come primarily from a response I gave in a blog comment.)When you start out, you need to develop the fundamentals (see my article onDevelop the Basicsin the "How to Be a Champion" articles.) As you develop your shots, your playing style will gradually emerge. Some players have a firm idea on how they want to play almost from the start - hitter, looper, blocker, chopper, etc. Others aren't sure at first, often for years, as they develop their game. And the style often changes - I was an all-out hitter my first three years, then switched gradually all-around, with equal emphasis between looping, hitting, and steady countering, plus a little of just about everything else.Style comes from two things: what the player does well, and what the player wants to do. They are not always the same, but they usually have a large overlap as players tend to get better at the things they want to do (because they use them more), and they tend to want to do the things that they do well, since that leads to winning. So most often players naturally develop a style based on these two factors. Others really want to play a specific style, perhaps because they saw a top player play that way. They may simply want to be a chopper or lobber because of the spectacular points they play. Or they may develop a blocking style, but simply decide they want to play like most world-class players do and become a looper. (That's a primary reason why I switched from all-out hitting to more looping.)With my students, I regularly advise them on how their game is developing, with two things in mind. First, develop an over-powering strength, something that will dominate at whatever level they are at, and develop a style around that strength. Second, develop all aspects of the game you will use since having strengths do not help if opponents can simply play into your weaknesses. So I try to lead them into a style that will win for them. But that style also has to match what they want to do. There's no point telling someone to be a looper if he hates looping, like one of my students.Once you have begun developing a style, you should continue to develop that style. Watch players with similar styles, learn what they do andwhy(this is important - don't be afraid to ask the player), and incorporate whatever you think will work for you.Since rallies begin with serve and receive, this means developing serves and receives that work for your style. This is probably the most under-utilized, under-thought, and under-developed part of most player's games.For example, if you have a nice loop against backspin, it might not be to your advantage to push too many short serves back long, since this gives the opponent a chance to loop and so lowers the chance of a backspin return you can loop. It also might not be to your advantage to flip, which gets you into a topspin rally, and again takes away your loop against backspin. Instead, a player like that might develop a short push, which increases the chances that the opponent will push long, giving you that backspin ball to loop. Similarly, short backspin serves will often give you long push returns to loop. And if you serve topspin, you are unlikely to get a backspin return from most players. (This doesn't mean you don't vary in these other receives and serves, just remember they are variations to the shots that should be more central to your game. For example, a sudden long push receive against some players will often result in a push return to set up your loop.)If you are a hitter or counter-hitter who likes to get into bang-bang topspin rallies, you might want to serve and receive more with topspin. Or you might serve short backspin and follow with a slow, very steady loop to get into those topspin rallies.Find the unique aspects of your style that give opponents trouble and focus on winning with those shots. Germany's Timo Boll, the #1 European, forehand loops with a somewhat unorthodox extreme forehand grip. This gives him perhaps the best inside-out loop in the world (his lefty loops usually break to the left), and he uses this to great effect. Much of his game is used to set up this shot, which is a primary reason he's the only European who can often challenge the Chinese. At the same time, if a shot is too unorthodox, consider whether the benefits of the shot outweigh the negatives, since the very fact that it is unorthodox means it likely has problems, or it would become "orthodox." (Sometimes the unorthodox becomes orthodox, such as reverse penhold backhands or attacking short serves to the forehand with the backhand.)One last thing to think about when developing your style. Since so much of style comes from serve and receive, sometimes the style comes from those shots. For example, if you develop a serve that players keep popping up, you might develop a nice smash, and you are well on your way to becoming a hitter - all because of the serve you developed. Or if you have a nice backspin serve, you'll get a lot of backspin returns, and so you might develop a nice loop, and you are well on your way to becoming a looper - all because of the serve you developed. So while you should develop serve and receive to match your style, sometimes style comes from the serve and receive.Ultimately, you should develop a personal style that's all your own, and really know your style. Given the chance, you should be able towrite a book on your game; if you can't, either you don't know your game or you don't have a game. Sound familiar? See the August 15, 2011 Tip of the Week:The Book on Your Game.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/590title: September 19, 2011 - Balance Leads to Feet-first Footworkdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players move their playing hand and arm first when moving to a ball, when the first thing that should move are the feet. If you move your arm first, several very bad things are happening. First, it means you are slower in moving into position since you haven't started moving your feet first. Second, you will tend to reach for the ball--since by moving your hands first youarereaching for the ball--and so will generally hit an awkward shot. And third, by reaching for the ball, you go off balance, with your weight on the foot in the direction you are reaching, and so will have great difficulty moving the feet at that point, since you are now weighted down on the lead foot, the very one that should be moving first in the direction you need to move. (Try this and you'll see what I mean.)Instead, focus on staying balanced. This means your weight should always be between your feet when moving. There might be a weight shift once you have moved into position (especially on forehand shots), but not before. Balance allows you to move quickly in either direction and to glide into position. It makes that first step very easy. (Remember to step first with the right to move right, with the left to move left.)Most coaches do tell you to move your feet first, not the playing hand and arm, but players often have trouble following this. I've found that if you coach the player to focus on the balance aspect, then they more naturally move the feet first, since balance is what allows this to happen easily, and it's the playing hand and arm movement that takes a player off balance--so by focusing on balance, they stop doing that. Give it a try, and get your game into balance!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/568title: September 12, 2011 - The Myth of Thinking Too Muchdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Some players are accused of "thinking too much." There's no such thing as thinking too much. The problem is knowing when to do the thinking.The rule is simple. You think between games and between points. When the point is about to start, you stop thinking. You blank your mind out and just let go. It is thinking during the point that causes a person to freeze up with uncertainty, often labeled as choking. Once the point begins, the conscious you is not controlling play; it is your subconscious that takes over.Some players can't stop thinking when play begins, and try to consciously control their shots. That rare;u ends well. Others are able to let go and let the subconscious take over, but don't think between points either. That rarely ends well tactically.Think about what actually happens when you play. Suppose your opponent gives you a backspin. Do you consciously say to yourself, "Ah, the ball has backspin, I must aim up this much to return it." Hopefully not! Instead, after facing backspins for a while--and probably messing up at the start, and telling yourself you need to aim up against backspin--your subconscious gets the message, learns just how much to hit up against varying degrees of backspin, and it becomes habit. The same is true of tactics.How can you play tactics during the point if you aren't thinking during the point? The answer is if you spend enough time thinking about tactics, it too will get absorbed by your subconscious. If you decide you need to loop a deep serve to the opponent's wide forehand, you don't wait until you see a deep serve, and tell yourself, "Ah, a deep serve. I should loop it to the wide forehand." Instead, if you remind yourself regularly what you need to do, the subconscious will learn to get the message, and you'll do it automatically.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/556title: September 5, 2011 - Short serves to the middledate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you like to follow your serve up with your forehand, you probably want to serve short (so the opponent can't attack your serve with a loop) and most often to the middle. Why?If you serve short to the backhand, the opponent has a wide angle into your backhand. You'll likely have to follow your serve up with your backhand.If you serve short to the forehand, the opponent has a wide angle into your forehand. To cover this, you have to leave your backhand side open to a down-the-line return, and if your opponent does this, you'll have to follow up your serve with your backhand.If you serve short to the middle, you don't have to guard against any extreme angles - their return options are limited. The amount of potential table to cover is less than a short serve to the corners. (There's also the added advantage that the opponent has to make a decision between forehand and backhand. And since most players favor their backhand against short serves, this may leave them vulnerable to deep serves, if the receiver is already committed to a backhand receive.) So perhaps make serving short to the middle central to your serve and follow game.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/540title: August 29, 2011 - Suggested equipment for beginning and intermediate playersdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:I'm not an EJ - Equipment Junky - and I long ago gave up trying to keep track of the seven trillion different rubbers and rackets. When I started out in 1976, the choice was basically Mark V, Sriver, or D-13, and then it was an earth-shattering event when Butterfly came out with Tackiness. So I'm not going to give specific recommendations on exactly what equipment you should get.Good technique (from coaching and training) can take a beginner rated 500 to 2500 and beyond. Better equipment may take an 1800 player to 1825, perhaps 1850, i.e. he'll be a little better against his peers. (I'm assuming you at least have something reasonable to start with.) However, having the right equipment is important, and here are my recommendations.1) Beginners and others not that familiar with what's out there need to go through a period where they try out the various rubber and rackets just so they know what the choices are.2) Once you find something that fits your game, generally stick with it unless your game changes or there's a major equipment breakthrough. (Equipment breakthroughs generally take place about once every five years or so, though you'll see headlines on "new" breakthroughs every six months.) This doesn't mean you shouldn't try out the equipment of others, and occasionally change if you find something you like. But don't get into the habit of constantly changing or you'll never really get comfortable with any equipment. Most breakthroughs are for the most advanced sponges designed for advanced players, and so won't apply to you unless you are at least an advanced intermediate player.3) Most players use rackets that are too fast. I recommend a medium speed blade for beginners, a medium to fast blades for more advanced players. Few should use the ultra-fast blades that are on the market as few can control them. (I can't.) The other key is it should simply feel right when you hit with it.4) Most players used a flared grip. Some use a straight grip, which generally seems to help the backhand. A few use others, such as anatomic. Try them out and see what feels right.5) If you are playing regularly, and your racket isn't too fast, then you can use modern sponges. I don't recommend sponges with built-in glue effects for beginners, but you do want something modern and relatively fast. Later you can try out the bouncier stuff, which is mostly for looping. Start out with something in the 1.5 to 1.9mm range.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/526title: August 22, 2011 - Strategic Versus Tactical Thinkingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:What's the difference? Strategic thinking is how you develop your game. Tactical thinking is how you use what you have to win. For example, if you have a good loop, a strategic thinker would think about what types of serves will set up your loop, and develop those serves in practice sessions. A tactical thinker would think about what serves will set up your loop in a match against a given opponent. Strategic thinking takes place during the developmental stage of your game--which never ends as long as you are still practicing. Tactical thinking takes place while preparing for and playing a specific match. You need both.Suppose you have a weak forehand attack against backspin. When an opponent pushes heavy to your forehand, you have to tactically choose whether to use your weak forehand attack (perhaps using good ball placement to make up for the weakness of the attack), or whether to just push it back. Tactically, these are probably your only options. Strategically, you should note this weakness in your game, and go practice it so next time you aren't so limited tactically.Are you developing your game strategically, i.e. giving yourself the weapons you need tactically? Are you developing your game tactically, i.e. learning to use the weapons you have developed strategically?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/499title: August 15, 2011 - The Book on Your Gamedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The Book on Your GameIf you can't write a book on your game, either you don't know your game or you don't have a game. It's as simple as that.Most likely, if you are reading this tip and are at least a semi-serious player, youdohave a game. So what is your game? What are your strengths, weaknesses, and in-between ones? How do you serve, return serves, and rally to get your strengths into play and dominate, while avoiding using your weaknesses? When do you use your other shots (shots that are neither strengths nor weaknesses, but something in between)? While you don't want to tie yourself down on what you'd do in any given situation, you should have a specific repertoire of shots you favor in any given situation, and be able to pick and choose from among those shots in any given situation, based on your opponent's game. Above all else, how do you dominate a match?Not everyone's a writer, and few of you are actually going to write a book on your game. But you should be able to at least outline the book on your game, and have the entire book in your head. If you can't, then perhaps you need to think about your game and get to know it. Or, if you are new to the sport, develop your game, and get to know it as it is developed.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/489title: August 8, 2011 - Playing Leftiesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The problem with playing lefties is two-fold: first, their shots come out differently than righties, and second, your natural ball placement to a righty is usually wrong against a lefty. The first part is more or less a matter of playing lefties until you get used to how their shots come out. The two shots from a lefty that most commonly mess up a righty are aggressive crosscourt backhands to the wide forehand, and their serves, especially forehand serves into your forehand that break away. (Hint - if you wait until the last second and then lunge for the ball as it breaks away, you're probably going to miss. Since you probably lower your racket as you lunge, you will probably go long.) It's just a matter of getting used to these shots.One trick for returning a lefty's forehand serve into your forehand is to aim the ball down the line to the lefty's forehand. The lefty has to be ready to cover that shot, and so at the last minute you can take the ball crosscourt into their backhand. (This is assuming they are stronger on the forehand; if the reverse, you may do the reverse.)Assuming you are comfortable against a lefty's shots, then the key becomes tactical. Where do you want to play your shots? For example, against a righty, you might play steady shots to the backhand, knowing the opponent can't put his backhand through you - but now that same shot goes into a lefty's forehand, where he may have more power. Or you might play quick shots to a righty's forehand, if your backhand is quicker than the opponent's forehand - but now that shot goes into a lefty's backhand, which not only may be as quick or quicker than your backhand, but also gives him that wide angle into your forehand.So you may want to rethink your basic ball placement shots - but also use the reverse. Against a lefty, now you can hit quick, aggressive backhands crosscourt into their wide forehand; now you can lock them up on their backhands with your forehand into their backhand. Plus now you can use your own forehand pendulum serve that breaks into their forehand. (Though here the lefty has an advantage - he's probably more used to a righty doing that to him than you are used to a lefty doing it to you.)So there are really three basic keys to playing a lefty - the aforementioned getting used to their shots and ball placement. However, the latter is really two things - learning (instinctively) what shots you do against righties that you don't want to do against lefties, and learning (also instinctively) what shots you normally don't do against righties that work against lefties.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/480title: August 1, 2011 - Jerky Strokes and Jerkyitis: World's Most Rampant Table Tennis Diseasedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players have jerky strokes that make them look like a marionette on a vibrating bed. Jerky strokes mean the player is mostly using one muscle for the stroke, often at near full-power, which is nearly impossible to control. It's better to use more muscles smoothly, i.e. at less than full power, for control as well as more power since you are both using more muscles and are smoothly accelerating into the ball rather than trying to jerk your stroke at full power at the last second.Jerkyitis is a horrible disease, according to top-secret papers from the Center for Disease Control. It cannot be cured. Like an accent a person has when learning a language at an older age, there will always be a bit of stiffness in your shots. But it can be controlled, just as that person with an accent can still develop conversational skills. How do you learn to control your jerkiness? By not rushing your shots, by relaxing your arm, and not trying to consciously guide your shots during a rally.To avoid rushing your shots, you may need to take a quarter- or half-step back to give yourself more time to take a more relaxed shot. Players who suffer from jerkyitis often are jammed at the table, taking every ball right off the bounce, and doing so only grudgingly since they look like they to want to take the ballbeforethe bounce. This is actually okay for a mostly blocking style, but for most shots, it's a symptom of jerkyitis; left untreated, your game may die a slow, malingering death.Relaxing the arm is easy - you just need to do so. Before the rally, relax your arm at your side, then gently and smoothly raise it into your ready position. Okay, it sounds easy, and it should be easy, but the key is to keep it relaxed once the rally begins. There's a natural tendency to tighten the muscles as the ball is coming toward you as you try to guide the shot. Instead, just let the shot happen on its own - rely on your many years (months? weeks? days?) of training rather than trying to consciously trying to control each shot - which is the third thing you need to avoid to get rid of those jerky shots.One way to practice smoothness is to do random drills. This means your partner or coach hits balls randomly to your side of the table, and you just react to each shot, using the principles outlined above. (You can do this either live or with multiball.) At first, have your partner or coach hit the ball randomly either to your forehand or backhand; when you can react to those shots easily and smoothly, then increase the complexity and have the shots go truly random, i.e. to the middle and wide corners.We'll never wipe out jerkyitis, but if we all work together, we can wipe out much of its effects, and turn your game into an (almost) smooth-stroking table tennis machine. (In the interest of transparency, I am a lifelong sufferer of jerkyitis, but it hasn't stopped me from reaching a rather high level as a player and coach.)===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/470title: July 25, 2011 - Importance of Serve Varietydate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players develop a small but effective set of serves, and find success with this. However, often they are limiting themselves with a lack of variety.While it is important to develop a small set of highly effective serves that you can use over and over, it's also important to have enough variety in your serves that you can most likely find one that the opponent has trouble with.For example, many players develop very nice forehand pendulum serves, the most popular serve in high-level table tennis. But since so many players do this serve, many opponents are good at receiving them, while having trouble with other serves. I've seen many players who have trouble with a specific serve, such as a backhand serve short to the forehand. (This has the opposite sidespin as a forehand pendulum serve, though it can be mimicked with a reverse forehand pendulum serve.) And then when I coach against this player, I find that the player I'm coaching can't do this serve! Often they can do the regular forehand pendulum serve short to the forehand, but it's the other type of sidespin that the player has trouble with.Another example would be fast and deep serves. Many players have difficulty with certain types of these, such as fast and dead to the middle (elbow). And yet many players can't do this simple serve, and so are giving away many points, games, and possibly a winnable match. Fast sidespins to the wide backhand give many players trouble, and yet few bother to learn these serves. And then there are the all-out forehand loopers who loop every deep serve to the backhand - and woe be the server who can't cross up this player with a fast serve down the line to the forehand!The list goes on and on, and yet the principle is simple. Learn to serve short and long (including fast) to all parts of the table with all varieties of topspin, sidespin, and backspin (and don't forget corkscrewspin and no-spin! See article onspinif you're not sure about these two), and you'll have it all covered. While you don't need to be an expert on every serve, you should be at least proficient at most serves so you can pull out the needed ones when needed.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/458title: July 18, 2011 - The Mental State of a Looper Against a Pushdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you are a looper - and that means most players from the intermediate level on - then when someone pushes to you and you want to loop, you should be in one of four mental states. We're assuming you can loop both forehand and backhand, or (if no backhand loop) have very fast feet for #4.1) Loop forehand or backhand, depending on where the push goes. This means there's essentially a line from your opponent to your playing elbow (mid-point between your forehand and backhand), and if the ball is on the forehand side of that line, you forehand loop; if on the backhand side, you backhand loop.Advantages: You are ready to loop anything, and you don't have to go out of position.Disadvantages: Your opponent chooses if you are going to loop forehand or backhand (and presumably will have you do your weaker shot), and you might have problems deciding which way to go on pushes to the middle, especially quick ones.2) Favor forehand, but ready to loop backhand if it's a strong push to the backhand.This means you are ready to forehand loop most pushes, including ones to the middle and weak ones, but won't force it against a good push to the backhand, which you'll backhand loop. (Of course some might just push this ball.)Advantages: You are ready to forehand loop - presumably your stronger side if you choose this strategy - against most pushes, both strong ones anywhere except to the backhand, and weak ones anywhere.Disadvantages: You may have a lot of ground to cover on some shots if it's a good push toward the middle. If you are ready to forehand loop and are forced to backhand loop, may not be ready and so may backhand loop weakly or inconsistently.3) Favor backhand, but ready to loop forehand if the push goes to the forehand side.This means you are literally setting up to backhand loop most pushes, including pushes to the middle or even slightly toward the forehand side, but are ready to rotate the shoulders to the forehand side to forehand loop if the push goes there. You are basically telling your opponent, "I'm going to backhand loop, but if you want to give me an easy forehand loop, then push to my forehand."Advantages: Allows you to really prepare for your backhand loop, often compensating for having less power on that side. Also allows you to have less ground to cover for forehand loops. Allows you to stay in position for most loops. If your backhand loop is stronger than your forehand loop, then allows you to maximize the chances of backhand looping.Disadvantages: You'll be doing a lot of backhand loops, often weaker than the forehand loop. Can be caught off guard with a quick push to the forehand side if you are too quick to set up for a backhand loop. Can have trouble backhand looping pushes that go to the middle if you don't learn to step into position properly for this.4) All-out forehand looping.You basically decide in advance that if it's humanly possible, you are going to loop with your forehand. Can only do this if your footwork is fast and technically good. Off the serve, good footwork technique and anticipation can make up for not having fast feet. (Note that the logical alternative to this, all-out backhand looping from all over the table, is rarely done since there's less range on the backhand side. There are some players who do this, but they are rare.)Advantages: You get to use your forehand loop, presumably your stronger shot. Allows you to get into forehand position so you can do a series of forehand loops in a row. Takes the indecision out of the shot since you know what you are going to do.Disadvantages: You have a lot of ground to cover, and so can get caught out of position, both while trying to make the shot and for the next shot. May make weak or inconsistent shots if you aren't in position quickly enough.Conclusion: Which of the above do you use?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/448title: July 11, 2011 - Where to Place Your Putawaysdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Where should you put your putaway shots? Whether they are smashes or loop kills, there are basically three options.Option One: The easiest spot. This usually would be the longest diagonal. This gives the most table to aim for, and so is the safest and most consistent. The down side - it's also the spot most opponents will expect you to aim for, and so is the most likely to be returned. At the beginning/intermediate level, you should aim most putaways to the safest spot since it's probably not coming back.Option Two: Aim one way, go the other. Most often this means aiming for the longest diagonal, and then, as the opponent moves to cover that spot, going the other way, usually down the line. This is riskier as you both have less table to go for and you are setting up to go one way, then have to change at the last second, but it's also going to make it very difficult for the opponent to return this shot. It's only at the higher levels that opponents can react and cover both corners.Option Three: The opponent's middle. This is the transition spot between forehand and backhand. At all levels this is probably the most difficult spot to react to. There are players who can almost relentlessly return shot after shot at the corners, but go at their middle and they fall apart. This is the most common spot top players aim at. The down side - it means you don't get the long diagonal to aim for, plus it's a moving target, depending on where the opponent is. Also, a forehand-oriented player may counter-attack that ball with his forehand - but if he does, he's probably moving early, and leaving his wide forehand open, which is where you would go in this case.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/435title: July 4, 2011 - Coaching Against Yourselfdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Imagine coaching someone to play against you. What would you tell them? Now imagine coaching yourself to fix up the very weaknesses that you would coach an opponent to play into against you. The top authority on a player's game should be that player, so listen to yourself; you are a wise and knowledgeable coach!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/421title: June 27, 2011 - Complex Versus Simple Tacticsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:There's a myth that top players use complicated tactics to defeat opponents. Perhaps as they are about to serve they are planning out their first three or four shots? After all, chess players plan things out many moves ahead, and table tennis has been called chess at light speed.That's not what happens in table tennis. Top tactical players don't work out complicated tactical schemes; they look at all the complexities and find simple patterns to disarm an opponent. There are just too many variables to plan too much. It's better to focus on a few simple tactics that will tend to favor what you want to do. The key is choosing those few simple tactics. That's your primary goal in the first game of a match, equal in importance to actually winning that game.Some tactics are for setting up your own strengths. For example, if you have a powerful loop against backspin, you might serve backspin so you get a lot of push returns. If the receiver pushes at wide angles, you might serve backspin low to the middle, thereby taking away some of the angle. If you have trouble with heavy backspin, you might serve no-spin, which is more difficult to push heavy. (If you fake backspin and serve it low, it'll usually get pushed.) If you have a good smash, you might serve varying sidespin and topspin serves, with varying speeds and depths. If you are quicker than an opponent, you might serve topspin so you can get right into a topspin rally.Other tactics are to take away an opponent's strength. For example, if an opponent has a powerful forehand, a simple remedy would be to serve short to the forehand, and then attack out to the backhand, thereby taking the forehand out of the equation. If an opponent has a strong push that is difficult to attack, then serve topspin. If an opponent has strong side-top serves and a good follow-up, then focus on returning the ball deep. If an opponent has a strong forehand and backhand, perhaps go after his middle, the changeover spot between forehand and backhand. And so on.Similarly, you can use tactics to play into an opponent's weakness or to avoid exposing your own weaknesses. See if you can come up with your own list of tactics of this type. Ideally you'll learn to play your strengths against an opponent's weaknesses. But sometimes you'll play your medium shots to the opponent's weaknesses, or your strengths to the opponent's medium shots.Most top players focus on just a few tactics - perhaps two or three serve tactics, one or two receive tactics, and one or two rally tactics. This doesn't mean they don't use other tactics as the situation comes up, but they are standard tactics that are ingrained from years of playing and thinking about the sport. The specific tactics against a specific player are far more limited, and yet, if chosen properly, will pay off dividends.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/402title: June 20, 2011 - Are You a Tree or a Squirrel?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Squirrels run circles around trees, and there's a lesson there. If you are a tree, you just stand there, rooted to the ground, waiting on each shot to see if you have to move. By the time you realize you have to move - how often does your opponent happen to hit the ball right into your forehand or backhand pocket so it'll hit right in the middle of your paddle? - it's too late, and so you can only awkwardly reach for the ball. There are no proud redwoods in table tennis, only weeping willows.If you are a squirrel, then you are constantly in motion. You expect to move, and so between shots you flex your knees, perhaps do a small bounce, and instead of deciding whether to move, decidewhereto move. And then you lightly scamper after every shot, or perhaps lumber if you're an out-of-shape squirrel, but at least you are moving, allowing you to make strong shots.A good way to practice this is with a random drill. Have a partner block or feed multiball randomly all over the table. Your job is to be ready to move instantly as soon as you see where the ball's going, while at the same time not anticipating, just reacting. Make sure your first move is always the right move. With practice, you'll become proficient, and that'll show up in your match results.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/385title: June 13, 2011 - Playing the Fisherdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The fisherman (or fisherwoman?) . . . the scourge of many. The player who backs up and softly and defensively topspins everything back a few feet over the net. His shots are not quite lobbing, not quite looping, and not quite counter-hitting. It can take a lot of work to race around the table attacking his shots with your forehand - not easy when the fisher puts the ball side to side, deep on the table, with both topspin and sidespin so the balls jumps as it hits your side of the table. How does one play this style?First off, you have to decide how physical you can play. If you have the foot speed, stamina, and a strong enough forehand (looping or smashing) to attack each of these shots with your forehand, then by all means do so, though (as explained below) the occasional change-of-pace may be important, depending on how steady the fisher is. The key is how you attack them.If you don't have the foot speed, stamina, or a strong enough forehand to keep attacking, then you will have to mix in blocks, especially with your backhand. (Of course, if you have a far more powerful backhand than forehand - rare, but sometimes the case - then attack with the backhand.) Don't feel as if this is a major weakness - more players lose to fishers by over-attacking than by ones who change the pace by mixing in blocks along with their attacks.The arc of a ball from a fisher is longer, and the topspin makes the ball bounce out, so the top of the bounce is about a half step farther off the table than you might expect. Unless you have great reflexes and timing and can take the ball off the bounce, you'll need to take a half step back to smash or loop at the top of the bounce. Otherwise you'll get jammed.Here are the keys to playing a fisher.Placement: Never attack the middle forehand or middle backhand - those are the easiest shots for the fisher to return. Instead, focus on the wide backhand and middle (elbow area), and the wide forehand when you think you have a clean winner (or if the fisher happens to be weak on that side, though usually that's the strong side). Since a fisher needs to anticipate where your attacks are going in order to react to them, if you can aim one way and go another, he'll struggle.On the forehand side, the fisher has a bigger hitting zone, more range, can more easily create both topspin and sidespin, and can more easily counter-attack, usually with a counterloop. Usually avoid this side until you see a clean winner.On the backhand side, the fisher is more cramped, and normally has less range, less spin, and less potential for a counter-attack. Go after this side with a vengeance, along with attacks to the middle.  Most attacks to the wide backhand side will come back to your backhand side, allowing you to continue your attack into the wide backhand, where you have more table than if you go down the line or to the middle. The catch is to do so, you have to step all the way around your backhand side if you want to use your forehand.In the middle, the fisher has to make a split-second decision on whether to go forehand or backhand, plus it's usually easier to run a ball down in the corners then to get out of the way of a ball in the middle. Focus on attacking the middle slightly on the backhand side to force an awkward backhand return. This is often a good spot to end the point on. However, there's more table when you go after the corners, so if you attack the middle over and over you are more liable to make a mistake. Some fishers seem to get every ball back on the backhand side, but that's because all the attacks are going right to the backhand side; mix in attack to the middle, and the fisher will begin to crumble.Change of Pace: Once a good fisher gets his timing down, he can often seemingly return shot after shot even as you smash or power-loop over and over. How do you break out of this pattern? Try changing the pace. Attack one ball softer than normal, or perhaps block one. The fisher is consistent off your strong attacks only because he is anticipating them, and so his timing and positioning are set for strong attacks. Change the pace, and you may mess up his timing and positioning. You might even try looping soft and spinny as a changeup, and watch the fisher struggle to adjust without missing or giving you an easy ball to put away.Loopor Smash?You can do either against a fisher, or (often even more effectively) do both. Do whichever you are more comfortable with. If you have a powerful loop, the extra topspin of your loop will make it easier to keep your attacks on the table; at the higher levels, top players pretty much kill-loop over and over against a fisher. But if you have a good smash, use that, especially if you can be deceptive with it.The Short Ball: As long as he keeps the ball deep on the table, a good fisher can run down almost anything you attack. The goal shouldn't be to end the point with each shot; the goal should be to put pressure on the fisher until he returns a ball that lands short. (Of course, in trying to force this, you'll force plenty of outright misses as well.) When you get that short ball, that's when you end the point. You can now attack the ball much closer to the table, at wide angles, and your opponent has less time to react. As long as you don't telegraph your shot, you should be able to rip this ball at a wide angle so that the opponent simply can't run it down, or to the middle where the opponent simply can't react.Special thanks to Deriderj, whoraised this question on the forum.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/376title: June 6, 2011 - Practice Matchesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:A practice match is just that - a practice match. The problem is that many only get the second part - "match" - and forget about that first part - "practice."This doesn't mean you don't take a practice match seriously or don't give it 100%. It's not a goof-off match; it's a practice match. But how should you approach a practice match differently than a tournament match?To start with, you should treat most practice matches almost the same as a tournament match. That means playing to win. But there are differences. Winning may no longer be top priority. On the other hand, playing well should always be a priority in practice - even if you don't win.In practice matches, if the goal is to improve, then this is your chance to practice whatever it is you need to improve. For example, if you're a blocker who is trying to develop his loop, practice matches are an opportunity to do that. Decide how you want to play in the future, and strive to play that way in practice. Your goal is to play well and to improve.But not all opponents are the same. Some are weaker; some are about your own level, and some are stronger. How should you approach these matches?Playing weaker players is a blessing. Now you can really practice your shots! Here's the chance for a blocker to work on his serve & loop; the looper to work on his blocking; and so on. Pick out something you need to work on, and go for it. Need to develop a counterloop? Let your opponent loop first and try to counterloop. Have trouble looping a heavy backspin? The weaker player might not have a good attack, but if he can push heavy, you have your practice. And so on. Against weaker players, practice your weaknesses, practice against their strengths, or go all the way and pit your weaknesses against their strengths. Or perhaps practice your own strengths, and see if you can completely dominate the match, if that's what needs work.Against players your own level, find a balance. Here's where you incorporate the things you developed playing against weaker players. When there are no tournaments or other important matches coming up, try to improve and add on to your game. If there are important matches coming up, focus more on playing to win, while picking and choosing what new techniques you can now use. Use the match to practice your normal game.Against stronger players, here's your chance to push your own strengths to a higher level. Improving isn't just about working on your weaknesses; it's also about making your strengths dominating. Do you have a good loop? Now's your chance to see if you can dominate a stronger player with it. Do you play fast? Now's your chance to see if you can play at the pace of the stronger player. And so on.Let's suppose one of these "practice" matches is close, and it's near the end of a game. What do you do? You could try winning with the shot or shots you are working on. Better still, this is your chance to practice learning how to win. So instead, play to win using whatever tactics are best. Practice isn't always about practicing a shot; it's also about practicing tactics. Learning to win, and what tactics to use to win, are huge practice.Let me re-emphasize that you should give 100% in practice matches; otherwise, you aren't being fair to your partner, and you are wasting your own time. But use the time intelligently, and optimize the development of your game. Play to win, but play to win using the shots you want to use for winning.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/367title: May 30, 2011 - Play Into the Weird Stuffdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Suppose your opponent has something that gives you problems. It could be a weird shot, like an inside-out or a sidespinning loop, or an extra-flat backhand, or a playing surface that gives you trouble. Should you avoid it? That's probably the first inclination, and if it's something you truly can avoid, then that might be the best strategy. But won't your opponent be trying to get whatever gives you trouble into play? You are probably going to have to deal with it. And the last thing you want to do is to still be having trouble with it near the end of the match, and lose because of it.Instead, find chances to play into it when you are ready for it, and get comfortable against it. When you can do that, then you can play tactics to avoid it, knowing you'll be ready for it when necessary.Here's one tip that may solve most of your problems with "weird" surfaces and strokes. Keep the ball deep on the table, and you'll have a lot more time to react and your opponent won't be able to angle you much. It's those short balls that come back quick and angled that cause most of the problems.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/358title: May 23, 2011 - Pushing: Five out of Six Doesn't Cut Itdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When you push long, you must do six things. If you do four or five, your push might give intermediate players trouble. Most players do several of these things well, and never understand that if they did them all, even advanced players would have difficulty attacking their pushes. The six things that top players do when pushing deep to make their pushes effective?Quick off the bounceDeepLowHeavyAngledDisguised placementIf you do most of these, you'll give intermediate players trouble. If you do all of them, you'll give advanced players trouble.A few notes on this. Angled placement doesn’t mean you never push quick to the middle—some players have trouble with that as they have to decide whether to use forehand or backhand—but most pushes should be angled to the corners. Disguised placement means not telegraphing where you are pushing, i.e. able to push to the wide forehand or backhand at the last second.The first time I really thought about this as a set of six attributes was while playing a practice match with 13-year-old future USA team member Han Xiao. I liked to serve short backspin and loop with my forehand, but I was struggling to loop his pushes. After losing the match (he was already about 2400!), I mentioned how I couldn't serve and loop with any power and consistency. He said that's because Coach Cheng Yinghua (former Chinese team member and four-time USA Men's Singles Champion) had told him that if he did these things with his push, my loop would fall apart. It did.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/352title: May 16, 2011 - A Levels Approach to Tacticsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:I like to divide tactics into five levels. First, think of your game and your opponent's game as a combination of strengths, average aspects, and weaknesses. Then there are nine possible combinations, divided into the five tactical levels.Level 2 tacticsYour strengths against opponent's weaknessesLevel 1 tacticsYour strengths against opponent's averageYour average against opponent's weaknessesLevel 0 tacticsYour strengths against opponent's strengthsYour average against opponent's averageYour weaknesses against opponent's weaknessesLevel -1 tacticsYour average against opponent's strengthsYour weaknesses against opponent's averageLevel -2 tacticsYour weaknesses against opponent's strengthsNext time you play a practice match, why not analyze your game and your opponents, and the tactics you use, and see what level tactics you are using? Are your tactics positive, or are you falling into negative territory?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/343title: May 9, 2011 - A Journey of Nine Feet Begins at Contactdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When you serve, do you just serve? Or do you stop and visualize the serve first? And when you visualize the serve, do you visualize all of it, or just part of it? You should visualize the entire journey the serve takes, all nine feet of it (or 10.3 feet, if you serve crosscourt).Contact point: How high from the table? Most players contact the ball too high, and so the ball bounces too high. Also, how far behind the endline? For spin serves, contact the ball just behind the endline - any further back simply gives the receiver more time to react, plus it's harder to control the depth from farther back, especially if you want to serve short. For fast & deep serves, contact is farther back so that the first bounce can be near your endline. Finally, where on the racket is the contact? For maximum spin, generally on the point on the racket furthest from the handle (the fastest moving spot). Or near the handle if you want to fake spin but serve no-spin. Visualize the contact.Spin: How much and what type of spin? You should visualize this very clearly before serving. Also visualize any extra motion you use for deception, such as a changing follow-through to deceive the receiver.Speed: How fast is the serve going out? If it's a spin serve, you don't want it going out too fast, as that would mean much of your energy went into speed instead of spin. However, even for a short serve, you might want it to have some pace to rush the opponent and to make it harder for him to control the return. Visualize the speed of the ball.First bounce: Where on the table? Generally, for short serves, the first bounce is nearer the net. However, the farther the bounce is from the net, the lower you'll be able to serve as the ball will have a lower trajectory as it passes the net. You should clearly visualize where the ball is going to bounce, as well as how it will bounce out from there. (On the first bounce, spin doesn't take nearly as much as the second bounce, but it does affect the bounce some.) This is probably the most overlooked part of serving.Curve in the air: How does the ball curve through the air? If a backspin, it should float; if a topspin, it should sink; if a sidespin, it should be breaking sideways. Visualize!Height over net: You want the serve as low as possible. Visualize this! If it is bouncing too high, then either your contact point was too high, or you are serving downward too much.Bounces on far side: Where is the first bounce? How does the ball break from the bounce? How high is the bounce? If too high, perhaps try serving so the first bounce on your side of the table is farther from the net, so the ball can cross the net with a lower trajectory. Given the chance, will there be a second bounce, and where would that be? Visualize it.Putting it all together - the serve as a whole: Once you've visualized all of the above, you should think of it as one continuous thing, not a series of discrete parts. Visualize the contact, spin, speed, bounces, and path of the ball as a whole. Then serve a winner!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/336title: May 2, 2011 - Exaggerate the Opposite Motion on Servesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you serve backspin, you follow through down, right? And if you serve topspin, you follow through up, right?WRONG! At least, you shouldn't. Instead, right after contact, try changing the direction of your racket and exaggerate theoppositemotion. Don't try to bring the racket to a stop and reverse directions; whip it about in a tight semicircle, making it almost impossible for the opponent to pick up just when you contacted the ball.Logically, if you always follow through downward on topspin serves, and upward on backspin serves, your opponent will pick up on this, right? Actually, not very often. Since returning serves (and most other table tennis strokes) is done instinctively, the receiver's instinctive reaction to a downward motion is to read backspin, and for an upward motion to read topspin. So in most cases you can get away with this, though you should vary your follow-through just in case.Note that you normally wouldn't serve pure backspin or topspin in table tennis; you more likely would serve side-backspin or side-topspin. When you serve side-backspin, follow-through up and to the side; when you serve side-topspin, follow through down and to the side. You'll be amazed at the confusion and havoc this will create.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/325title: April 25, 2011 - The Short Serve & Short Receive, and Loopingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The Short Serve & Short Receive, and LoopingBy Larry HodgesIf you have a nice loop, then you want to serve and return serves to set it up, right? Many players learn by the intermediate level that to serve and loop, you usually want to serve short. If you serve long, the opponent can loop, but if you serve short, usually with backspin, you normally get a long push return you can loop. So the centerpiece of many intermediate and advanced games is serve short and loop. (You can also serve short sidespin, topspin, or no-spin. Rather than a push return, you'll often get a flip return, which is also long and loopable. If the serve is very low, the flip will usually be weak enough for you to attack.)The corollary to this is that if you return a short backspin serve with a short push, you'll probably get a long push return you can loop. It takes practice to do this - you have to read and recognize the serve as short backspin, step in, and have the control to push with enough touch to keep it short and low. If you don't learn to do this, then you'll probably be pushing long (letting the other guy loop) or flipping (not a bad idea, but predictable and off a low ball, it can be attacked). At first you'll mess up a lot, but with practice, it'll be a big part of your game, regularly setting up your loop. Watch the best players, and you'll see that short receive is central to many of their games.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/294title: April 18, 2011 - Fifteen Important Deep Servesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Fifteen Important Deep ServesBy Larry HodgesWhen you serve fast & deep, you want to aim at one of three main targets: to the wide forehand, wide backhand, or at the receiver's elbow. It's also best to have at least two variations so they can't adjust, ideally with a fast sidespin or side-topspin serve, and a fast no-spin serve. (No-spin serves don't jump off the paddle as fast, so opponents have to stroke the ball more, which is problematic when you rush them by serving fast no-spin.) So players should develop at least six variations of their fast & deep serves - but preferably more. You can do it with sidespin left, sidespin right, side-top left, side-top right, and no-spin, and can do all of these to the wide forehand, wide backhand, and middle. That's fifteen variations, and that's just to start, since you can vary the degree of each type of spin, as well as the motion used for the serve. (Regarding the motion, I like to serve down the line to a righty's forehand by aiming to their backhand and switching directions the split second before contact. Try it!)It takes more timing to do a fast & deep serve with great speed than with other serves. So even if you use these serves only occasionally, you need to practice them far more than the proportion of times you use the serves. If you don't, when the score is close and the time comes to catch the receiver off guard with a fast & deep serve, will you really be able to pull it off consistently at full speed?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/324title: April 11, 2011 - The Value of Down the Linedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:The Value of Down the LineBy Larry HodgesCrosscourt. It's so much easier to hit that way. Most often you get to hit the ball back the way it's coming, and it's easier to hit that way than re-directing it down the line. You've probably hit so much forehand-to-forehand and backhand-to-backhand that it's more natural to you. And you've got 15.5 more inches of table than when hitting down the line. (Do the math.)But guess what? Your opponent also likes those crosscourt shots, and he's probably already setting up for it. Watch that split second of absolute horror on his face as he realizes you are going down the line - or at least a look of apprehension - and you'll know the value of down-the-line shots.Oh, and when you warm up, hit some forehand-to-backhand and backhand-to-forehand. It's a big table out there; use both sides of it.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/272title: April 4, 2011 - What is the Goal of the Receiver?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:What Is the Goal of the Receiver?By Larry HodgesReturning serve is the most difficult part of the game to master. There are more variations to prepare for than at just about any other time--reading spin off a fast motion, topspin or backspin, sidespin either way, corkscrewspin, no-spin, long or short, fast or slow, to wide angles or the middle--there are infinite possibilities. And yet, most players don't practice their receive much, except in games, and there they are looking to win, not try something new that might cost them a match. Instead, find someone with decent serves and practice returning them. (And do the same for him.)But you also need to know what to do with the serve. There are two possibilities.1)Aggressive receive that takes the initiative.Here the receiver should play aggressive, take the initiative (or even go for a winner), and try to dominate the point. Examples include a short serve that pops up slightly, a serve that goes long that the receiver is ready for (and should usually loop), and serves where the receiver reads the serve well early on and is comfortable attacking. A player should always be looking for such serves and be ready to pounce on them.The goal isn't to win the point on one shot; the goal is to take the initiative and put the receiver in an uncomfortable position. Key to this is placing the shot, either to a wide angle or to the opponent's middle (opponent's transition point between forehand and backhand, usually the elbow). When flipping very aggressively, you might consider mostly flipping crosscourt at a wide angle, as this gives you more table to aim for.The down side to an aggressive receive is that you will also lose some points from missing. It's a tradeoff.Some players are afraid to attack serves, and return almost all serves passively. This makes things easy for the server, since he can serve knowing that he's going to get a ball he can attack. You need at least the threat of an attack to make a controlled receive more effective.2)Controlled receive that neutralizes the serve.The goal is to force the opponent into a mistake or a weak attack, or to catch them so off guard they can't attack at all. These receives are the most misunderstood. Against a short serve, don't just push the serve back mindlessly--do something with the return to put pressure on the server. Push quick off the bounce, deep, at a wide angle, low, and with good backspin. Change directions at the last second. Drop it short. Push with sidespin. Push with no-spin, but with a vigorous wrist motion just after contact to fake backspin. Do a steady, well-placed flip. (You should flip most short serves that don't have backspin.) Constantly vary your receive so your opponent never knows what you're going to do next.Against a long serve, mostly loop, but go for consistency, spin, placement, and depth.Some players feel they have to attack every serve. They aren’t confident that they can handle the opponent’s first attack if they use a controlled receive, even if the opponent's attack isn’t very strong. The problem here isn’t the receive—it’s the defense. If you can’t block an opponent’s loop (or consistently handle it in some other way that fits your game), then you need to work on your defense.Which of the two receives should you use?You should generally favor controlled receives until you have mastered that, and are comfortable against the opponent's attack off that receive. When you can do that, you'll have enough control to be more aggressive off the serve, and then you should do either, depending on your opponent and your playing style.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/255title: March 28, 2011 - Seven Placements and the Wide Anglesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:There are basically seven different directional placements in table tennis, though only five or six are available at any time. They are:Outside forehand cornerForehand cornerMiddle forehandMiddle (opponent's elbow)Middle backhandBackhand cornerOutside backhand cornerGenerally, you never want to put a ball to the middle forehand or middle backhand, where your opponent is just standing there, ready to hit a forehand or backhand. Most often you should be going to the wide corners or the opponent's elbow. The other options are outside the corners, but these can be tricky to play into - you have less table, and so it's easy to go long (or more specifically, off the side). Here are your options for going outside the wide corners:Off a short ball in the middle of the table, you can play either wide angle.Off a deep ball toward the middle of the table, it's difficult to play either, though with good topspin you can. You can also sidespin loop at a wide angle.Off a deep ball from one of your cornersyou can play diagonally outside the corner, especially if you can sidespin loop. This gives you the most extreme angles, and should become a staple of every player.When servingyou can serve from a corner and, with a breaking sidespin, serve at extremely wide angles.When you can play into those wide angles outside the corners, your opponent will have great difficulty as you greatly increase the amount of table he has to cover. So add these angles to your repertoire and turn table tennis into a truly full-court sport.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/256title: March 21, 2011 - Shadow Practice Your Shotsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:If you spent five-ten minutes each day shadow practicing your strokes and footwork, you'll be surprised at the improvement, not to mention the health benefits. Make it part of your fitness regimen. For example, every day do 50-100 forehands, backhands, forehand loops, backhand loops, and side-to-side footwork, alternating forehands and backhands or just doing all forehand, side to side. Adjust to your own style of play, i.e. if you mostly loop the forehand, do lots of forehand looping shadow practice. If you are a chopper, do lots of chopping. Vary the routine to include other moves you use regularly, such as shadow practice stepping in and flipping a short ball to the forehand, or a forehand loop against backspin followed by a smash or loop against topspin. When no one's watching (if you're shy), play out points as if they were real!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/257title: March 14, 2011 - Why You MUST Attack the Deep Servedate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Against a short serve, you can take the ball quick and rush the opponent, you can go for angles, and you can drop the ball short. So have a number of ways to mess up an opponent without actually attacking the serve. This is where you can get really creative.Against a deep serve, you don't have these options. You can't rush the opponent with a quick shot, go for extreme angles, and you can't return it short. If you return the deep serve passively, you are giving your opponent lots of time to set up his best shot. So don't.Instead, get in the habit of attacking deep serves. Ideally you should loop them. If you make mistakes at first (you will), then that's the best reason to keep attacking them - to learn to attack them. The more you do it, the better you'll get at it, and your level will go up.The key is to practice attacking them, generally by looping, both in games and in practice. I've seen many players lose a match because they couldn't return serves effectively - and later they'd be off practicing their strokes rather than practicing return of serve. If you have trouble attacking a deep serve (or any other serve return), find someone who can do the serves that give you trouble, and practice against them, either in a practice session or matches.There will always be exceptions to the "rule" of attacking deep serves. For example, some players have trouble against backspin, and against them you might want to push deep backspin serves. Or you might want to roll back a serve with soft, defensive topspin if the opponent has trouble with that. But these are generally tactics for lower-level play, and if your goal is to win at a lower level, then by all means continue to return deep serves passively.At higher levels, there are players who do return deep serves defensively, such as choppers, who may return a deep serve with a defensive backspin, but even here the backspin returns may be fairly aggressive, i.e. heavy, deep, and angled. And there are high-level players who are not good against backspin, and so relatively passive backspin returns might be effective, especially as a changeup. And if you are attacking most serves, then an occasional defensive return is a good changeup against some players.But these are the exceptions. A player may get away with passive returns of a deep serve, but the key here is they are getting away with a weakness when they could be better players if they returned the serve by being aggressive. Rather than cover for a weakness, why not make attacking deep serves a strength?===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/258title: March 7, 2011 - Do You Hit to the Three Spots?date_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Table tennis is chess at lightning speed. Imagine that split second as you are about to hit the ball. Do you hit wherever, or do you pick the placement like choosing a move in chess? There are three main spots to choose from (plus a huge number of other variables, i.e. speed, spin, depth, which stroke to use, etc.). Pick the best move! When attacking, most opponents don't have all three spots well covered - wide forehand, wide backhand, middle (playing elbow). Most have the backhand covered, at least at the start of the rally, and maybe one of the other spots. Most players just go to the backhand, the place the opponent almost always has covered. Pick your spot, don't telegraph it, and perhaps fake one way and go another at the last second.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/259title: February 28, 2011 - A Forehand Stance While Blockingdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Many players go into a backhand stance when blocking. This is fine for the backhand, but it weakens the forehand side. Even worse, it makes smashing or counterlooping on the forehand much more difficult. You may find that you can block backhands almost as easily with a slight forehand stance, which also puts you in a position to block, smash, or counterloop if the ball goes to the forehand. (Also, a forehand stance makes it easier to step around the backhand if you see a weak ball to crush with your forehand.) Try experimenting with this. Many a player has won a match by standing in a forehand stance and just blocking backhands until the ball goes to the forehand, and thenWhammo!===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/260title: February 21, 2011 - Wait a split second longer when looping a push, then change directionsdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Most blockers develop timing to react to your normal loop. At the instant they think you will contact the ball, they commit to blocking either forehand or backhand. So set up to loop crosscourt, and make no attempt to hide this. At the instant you normally would contact the ball, watch the opponent move to cover the apparent crosscourt loop. Wait a split second longer than normal, letting the ball travel perhaps an six inches to a foot, and then go down the line. (This is especially effective when looping from the wide forehand.)You can do this the other way, faking down the line and then going crosscourt, but it's not usually as effective, for two reasons. First, since most players tend to loop crosscourt far more often than down the line, blockers tend to move to cover the crosscourt angle. Second, down the line is a shorter distance, and so the opponent has less time to recover for that shot.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/261title: February 14, 2011 - What To Do With Problem Servesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:Everybody has at least one serve that always gives them trouble. It might be a certain sidespin, or a deep serve, a short serve, a no-spin serve, an angled serve, etc. (For example, you can almost divide players into two groups - those who have fits with forehand tomahawk serves to the forehand, and those that loop them with ease. Which are you?) The question is what to do against these problem serves?First, focus on control. Place the ball, usually at a wide angle and deep. Often this alone will solve the problem. You don't need to dominate on an opponent's serve (though it helps); you need to break even, and dominate onyourserve.If you are still having trouble, analyze the problem. If you keep popping the ball up, or hitting it wide, adjust. If you keep making the same mistake, and don't adjust your return, you'll keep making the same mistake.Against some serves, you might try a "scare tactic." If there's a single serve that really bothers you, attack it relatively hard one time. Loop it or flip it aggressively! Scare the server. Even if you miss it, most often he won't use it again, at least very often. If he does keep using it, then you'll just have to figure out how to return that serve because you're up against a smart opponent. (I know I have far more difficulty looping a deep serve that breaks away from me, like a deep backhand serve or tomahawk serve. I have little trouble looping ones that break into me, such as a regular forehand pendulum serve. Guess which one I tend to be more aggressive with the first time I see it? The last thing I want to do is be too soft against a serve that breaks away from me, which is practically telling the opponent to keep giving me that serve since I have trouble with it.)Conversely, is there a serve that you are very good at receiving? One that you can really loop or flip aggressively, for example? Don't go overboard attacking this serve too much early in a game or you'll never see it again. Consider slowing down your attack of this serve, being consistent with good placement, and slowly building up a lead. Instead of one-shot winners, return the serve to take the initiative - play the percentages.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/262title: February 7, 2011 - Develop an Overpowering Strengthdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:At the beginning/intermediate levels, most matches are won by whoever is more consistent. Great strengths haven't yet developed, and so while players do have strengths, the matches are mostly won by whoever makes the least mistakes.As you advance, this changes. At the intermediate/advanced level, matches are mostly won by whoever gets his strength into play. The looper wins if he gets his loop into play. The hitter wins if he gets his hitting into play. Even the steady player - and steadiness can be a strength at all levels - wins if he's able to get into rallies where his steadiness prevails. And so on.It's not enough to just develop an overpowering strength. You also have to have ways of getting it into play. It's not enough to have a good loop or a strong hitting game if your serves or return of serve allows your opponent to attack and turn you into a blocker. It's not enough to be steady if your serve or return of serve allow your opponent to play his strengths, thereby overpowering your steadiness.So develop an overpowering strength (or strengths), and develop serve & receive techniques to get it into play. At its most basic level, table tennis is all about getting your strengths into play and stopping your opponent from using his.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/263title: January 31, 2011 - How To Return Different Servesdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:We will define a "short" serve as any serve that, given the chance, would bounce at least twice on the receiver's side of the table before going off the end. Any serve that doesn't do this will be considered a "long" serve.To attack short serves to the forehand, you will need to develop a forehand flip. The shot can be demonstrated by any top player or coach, or you can learn about it in most table tennis books.Treat sidespin and topspin serves almost the same if you attack them. Even a heavy sidespin will only affect the ball a foot or less if attacked at a reasonable pace, so start out by simply aiming a little away from the corners. Most mistakes are made in the net or off the end, which means misreading the topspin or backspin. As you get more advanced, you will need to learn to compensate for the sidespin so that you can accurately put the ball anywhere on the table. This may mean aiming one foot off the side of the table to get the ball to go into a corner, to compensate for the sidespin.No-spin serves are effective because they can be disguised as having spin, because they are easy to control, and because players are so used to returning backspin or topspin/sidespin serves that they have trouble with a ball with no spin. At the higher levels, a backspin serve is easier to push short than a no-spin ball, and a sidespin or topspin serve is easier to flip than a no-spin serve. With a no-spin serve, a server gets a consistent ball to attack, although fewer outright mistakes.Let's divide serves into three basic types, and explore how they should be returned.Long ServesShort Sidespin or Topspin ServesShort backspin or No-Spin ServesLong ServesThere is one general rule for returning long serves: ATTACK!!!This is true of all attacking players, and even for many defensive players. A chopper may return most deep serves defensively, but should mix in attacks. Most players should return a deep serve defensively only as a variation or for tactical purposes (such as against an opponent with a weak attack).Why should you attack deep serves? Because the serve is deep, you will be contacting the ball from farther away from the opponent than when returning a short serve. This means that your opponent has more time to react to the shot. If your shot is defensive, your opponent will have too much time to prepare his attack. Also, since you are farther away from the table, you have less angle, and so your opponent has less distance to move than going for the angled-off returns possible off a short serve.Fortunately, it is easier to attack a long serve. Ideally, you should loop any serve that is long. The table is not in the way as it would be for a short serve, and so you can take a longer backswing. You can also backswing from below the table to lift against backspin. If you don't have a loop, or can only loop with the forehand and aren't fast enough to regularly step around the backhand corner to loop with the forehand, then you should learn to drive the ball against deep serves (i.e. a simple forehand or backhand drive).When attacking a deep serve, remember to lift against backspin, but go mostly forward against topspin or sidespin serves. A common mistake is for receivers to drop their right shoulder too much (for right-handers) when looping a sidespin or topspin serve, and looping the ball off the end.Short Topspin or Sidespin ServesThe general rule here again is to attack (although you can also "chop-block" the ball back as a variation). On the backhand side, use your normal backhand drive, but with a somewhat shorter stroke, for control. On the forehand side, use a forehand flip for most returns. Go for well-angled returns, or at the opponent's elbow (his transition point between forehand and backhand). Usually, the best place to go is to the backhand, but many opponents will step around and use a forehand from the backhand corner, and so you might want to catch him by returning to his forehand. Also, a player might be stronger on the backhand than on the forehand, in which case you should return most serves to the forehand side.Many players, especially those who are fast on their feet and with good forehands, like to return nearly all short serves with their forehands. If you can do this, it is a tremendous advantage as it allows you to take the initiative in the rally AND puts you in position for a forehand on the following shot. Jean-Michel Saive of Belgium is the master of this technique.To chop-block the ball, keep your racket perpendicular to the table (roughly), and chop down on the ball - sort of half block, half push. What you don't want to do is push, since the racket normally aims upward when pushing. If you push a topspin or sidespin serve, the ball will shoot off the end or side.Certain short sidespins are easier to attack than others. A backhand sidespin serve is tricky to return with the forehand because the natural racket angle on the forehand side when reaching in (for right-handers) is to the left; to return this sidespin, the racket must aim to the right. Similarly, a sidespin serve going the other way is normally trickier to handle with the backhand, although the wrist is more flexible for this shot so it is easier to do. Some players favor the forehand or backhand for the receive, depending on what type of sidespin is coming.Short Backspin or No-Spin ServesThe general rule here is variation. Learn to flip, push short, and push long.The easiest way to return a short backspin serve is to push long. This is also a quick way to get into trouble. Top players learn to push very quick off the bounce, and develop a good block to defend the upcoming attack. However, many players push because that's all they know how to do against this serve, and that's a mistake. Push long by choice, for tactical purposes, not because you have no other choice. If you do push, push quick, low, with good backspin, to a wide angle.The most common receive at the higher levels is a short push, but many players don't have confidence in pushing short until they've practiced it and used it in competition for some time. So practice and use it until you perfect it! It becomes a very powerful weapon once mastered, taking away the server's advantage and stopping a third-ball loop.Lastly, learn to flip the ball at wide angles. Deception and placement are more important than speed. Many players make too many mistakes trying to flip hard. Instead, hide the direction of the flip until just before contact, and place the ball very quick off the bounce to the opponent's weakest spot. Don't think of a flip as an all-out attack; think of it as a way to disarm an opponent's serve and force a weak return.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/264title: January 24, 2011 - When Receiving, Emphasize Placement & Consistencydate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:When receiving, many players are either overly aggressive or too passive. It's important to find the middle range. However, it is even more important to understand that it is consistency, placement and variation that are most important.Flip kills and loop kills are exciting ways to return serves. However, they are also quick ways to lose the point via missing. Always remember that all you have to do is break even on your opponent's serve, and you'll probably win on your serve. So you don't need to hit a winner off the serve. Just return it in such a way that your opponent can't hit a winner - which normally means catching him at least slightly off-guard. To do this takes good placement, variation, and hiding the direction and shot selection until the last second.If you don't place the ball well, your opponent may jump all over your return. Few players can cover the entire table with a strong third-ball attack, especially if you don't telegraph your direction early in the shot, so it's important to figure out what part of the table your opponent will have the most trouble with, and go there. A well-placed passive return is often more effective than a strong return hit right at an opponent's strength.Without good variation, of course, your returns are predictable. Mix in loops, flips, pushes, drives, and do them at different speeds, spins, depths, as well as varying the placement. Aim one way, then at the last second go the other way so your opponent can never know where you are going until you contact the ball. If your opponent looks likes he's looking for a push return, give him anything but that.What is your primary job in returning serve? To mess your opponent up! Go to it.===ARTICLE===source_url: http://www.tabletenniscoaching.com/node/265title: January 17, 2011 - Push with Purpose and Placementdate_accessed: 2025-10-15TEXT:So often players push just to keep the ball in play. Push with purpose and placement! Do something with the push. So, what can you do?Purpose: There are three basic things you can do with the push. You can push it very heavy, with the purpose to force a mistake or weak return due to the heavy backspin. You can push quick and fast, often with last-second changes of direction, with the purpose of rushing your opponent and forcing a mistake or weak return. Or you can push short (so that the second bounce, given the chance, would bounce on the table), with the purpose of making it difficult or impossible to loop.Placement: Many players don't pay attention to this, they just get the ball back, and give the opponent his best shot, often a forehand loop. A push that lands six to twelve inches inside the backhand corner is easy to loop. A player with a strong forehand loop and decent footwork not only can use his forehand, but he doesn't have to go that far out of position to do so. A push that goes right over the corner, angling away, or even outside the backhand corner, is a different story - it takes very fast footwork to use the forehand against that ball, and if your opponent does, he's way out of position. Often he'll be rushed, and either make a mistake, a weak shot, or (often underestimated) his shot will be easy to read since a rushed player isn't very deceptive, and so his loop is easy to jab-block or counterloop away. (At the Teams in Nov., 2010, I coached a top cadet player to an upset over a 2350 player, with a major part of the strategy pushes to the very wide backhand. The opponent often stepped around and ripped them with his powerful forehand, but because he was rushed, his normally deceptive loop was easier to read, and so the cadet was able to block it back to the wide forehand over and over for winners.)The other option is pushing to the wide forehand. If your racket is aimed toward the opponent's backhand until the last second, and then you change and quick push to the forehand, your opponent's going to have a hard time reacting. If he does attack it, you can now just block to his backhand, taking his forehand out of the equation. (This assumes his forehand is stronger than his backhand; if the reverse, go after the forehand again as the player moves back to cover his backhand.)